GTE- Golden Tips of English 



T CAMBRIDGE 




GENERAL TRAINING 


WITH ANSWERS 


AUTHENTIC PRACTICE TESTS 


WITH AUDIO 


jt£j£;£{!r ^ 

(zmm* *¥&£££*#)«*= 





















s of English 


m CAMBRIDGE 



GENERAL TRAINING 



WITH ANSWERS 


AUTHENTIC PRACTICE TESTS 








GTE-iGolden Tips of English 


Cambridge University Press 

wvwv.cambridge.org/elt 

Cambridge Assessment English 

www.cambridgeenglish.org 

information on this title; www.cambridge.org/9781108717793 


© Cambridge University Press and UCLES 2019 

It is normally necessary for written permission for copying to be obtained 
in advance from a publisher. The sample answer sheets at the back of this 
book are designed to be copied and distributed in class. The normal requirements 
are waived here and it is not necessary to write to Cambridge University Press for 
permission for an individual teacher to make copies for use within his or her own 
classroom. Only those pages that carry the wording '© UCLES 2019 
may be copied. 

First published 2019 

20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 


I 1 U.. 


Printed in China by CNPIEC Beijing Congreat Printing Co., Ltd 
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library 

ISBN 978-1-108-69486-5 General Training Student's Book with answers with Audio China reprint edition 

ISBN .978-1-108-71779-3 General Training Student's Book with answers 

ISBN 978-1-108-68136-0 General Training Student's Book with answers with Audio 

ISBN 978-1-108-69492-6 Academic Student's Book with answers with Audio China reprint edition 

for New Oriental School 

ISBN 978-1-108-69485-8 Academic Student's Book with answers with Audio China reprint edition 
ISBN 978-1-108-71777-9 Academic Student's Book with answers 
ISBN 978-1-108-68131-5 Academic Student's Book with answers with Audio 
ISBN 978-1-108-71860-8 Audio CDs (2) 

The publishers have no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs 
for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and 
do not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate 
or appropriate. Information regarding prices, travel timetables, and other factual 
information given in this work is correct at the time of first printing but the 
publishers do not guarantee the accuracy of such information thereafter. 







GTE- Golden Tips of English 



Introduction 

4 

Test 1 

10 

Test 2 

33 

Test 3 

54 

Test 4 

77 

Audioscripts 

99 

Listening and Reading answer keys 

121 

Sample answers for Writing tasks 

129 

Sample answer sheets 

137 


Acknowledgements 


141 




Introduction 


A? 


The International English Language Testing System (IELTS) is widely recognised as 
a reliable means of assessing the language ability of candidates who need to study 
or work where English is the language of communication. These Practice Tests are 
designed to give future IELTS candidates an idea of whether their English is at the 
required level. 

IELTS is owned by three partners: Cambridge Assessment English, part of the 
University of Cambridge; the British Council; IDP Education Pty Limited (through its 
subsidiary company, IELTS Australia Pty Limited). Further information on IELTS can be 
found on the IELTS website www.ielts.org. 


WHAT SS THE TEST FORMAT? 


IELTS consists of four components. All candidates take the same Listening and Speaking 
tests. There is a choice of Reading and Writing tests according to whether a candidate is 
taking the Academic or General Training module. 


Academic 

For candidates wishing to study at 
undergraduate or postgraduate levels, 
and for those seeking professional 
registration. 


General Training 

For candidates wishing to migrate to an 
English-speaking country (Australia, Canada, 
New Zealand, UK), and for those wishing to 
train or study at below degree level. 


The test components are taken in the following order: 


4 sections, 

Listening 

40 items, approximately 30 minutes 

Academic Reading 

3 sections, 40 items 

60 minutes 

or 

General Training Reading 

V 3 sections, 40 items 

60 minutes 

Academic Writing 

2 tasks 

60 minutes 

r 

or 

General Training Writing 

2 tasks 

60 minutes 


Speaking 

11 to 14 minutes 



Total Test Time 

2 hours 44 minutes 

















GTE- 'Golden Tips' of English 


Introduction 


GENERAL TRAINING TEST FORMAT 


Listening 

This test consists of four sections, each with ten questions. The first two sections are 
concerned with social needs. The first section is a conversation between two speakers and 
the second section is a monologue. The final two sections are concerned with situations 
related to educational or training contexts. The third section is a conversation between up to 
four people and the fourth section is a monologue. 

A variety of question types is used, including: multiple choice, matching, plan/map/ 
diagram labelling, form comptetio.n, note completion, table completion, flow-chart completion, 
summary completion, sentence completion and short-answer questions. 

Candidates hear the recording once only and answer the questions as they listen. Ten 
minutes are allowed at the end for candidates to transfer their answers to the answer sheet. 

Reading 

This test consists of three sections with 40 questions. The texts are taken from notices, 
advertisements, leaflets, newspapers, instruction manuals, books and magazines. The 
first section contains texts relevant to basic linguistic survival in English, with tasks mainly 
concerned with providing factual information. The second section focuses on the work 
context and involves texts of more complex language. The third section involves reading 
more extended texts, with a more complex structure, but with the emphasis on descriptive 
and instructive rather than argumentative texts. 

A variety of question types is used, including: multiple choice, identifying information 
(True/False/Not Given), identifying the writer’s views/claims (Yes/No/Not Given), matching 
information, matching headings, matching features, matching sentence endings, sentence 
completion, summary completion, note completion, table completion, flow-chart completion, 
diagram label completion and short-answer questions. 

Writing 

This test consists of two tasks. It is suggested that candidates spend about 20 minutes on 
Task 1, which requires them to write at least 150 words, and 40 minutes on Task 2, which 
requires them to write at least 250 words. Task 2 contributes twice as much as Task 1 to the 
Writing score. 

In Task 1, candidates are asked to respond to a given situation with a letter requesting 
information or explaining the situation. They are assessed on their ability to engage in 
personal correspondence, elicit and provide general factual information, express needs, 
wants, likes and dislikes, express opinions, complaints, etc. . 

In Task 2, candidates are presented with a point of view, argument or problem. They 
are assessed on their ability to provide general factual information, outline a problem and 
present a solution, present and justify an opinion, and to evaluate and challenge ideas, 
evidence or arguments. 

Candidates are also assessed on their ability to write in an appropriate style. More 
information on assessing the Writing test, including Writing assessment criteria 
(public version), is available on the IELTS website. 


5 










GTE -i ■ G olderi■:Xips i oif Eng.", i sh 


Introduction 


I Speaking 

This test takes between 11 and 14 minutes and is conducted by a trained examiner. 

There are three parts: 

Parti 

The candidate and the examiner introduce themselves. Candidates then answer general 
questions about themselves, their home/famiiy, their job/studies, their interests and a wide 
range of similar familiar topic areas. This part lasts between four and five minutes. 

Part 2 

The candidate is given a task card with prompts and is asked to talk on a particular topic. 
The candidate has one minute to prepare and they can make some notes if they wish, 
before speaking for between one and two minutes. The examiner then asks one or two 
questions on the same topic. 

Part 3 

The examiner and the candidate engage in a discussion of more abstract issues which are 
thematically linked to the topic in Part 2. The discussion lasts between four and five minutes. 

The Speaking test assesses whether candidates can communicate effectively in English. 

The assessment takes into account Fluency and Coherence, Lexical Resource, Grammatical 
Range and Accuracy, and Pronunciation. More information on assessing the Speaking test, 
including Speaking assessment criteria (public version), is available on the IELTS website. 



6 






GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Introduction 


HOW IS I ELIS SCORED? 

IELTS results are reported on a nine-band scale. In addition to the score for overall language 
ability, IELTS provides a score in the form of a profile for each of the four skills (Listening, 
Reading, Writing and Speaking). These scores are also reported on a nine-band scale. All 
scores are recorded on the Test Report Form along with details of the candidate’s nationality, 
first language and date of birth. Each Overall Band Score corresponds to a descriptive 
statement which gives a summary of the English language ability of a candidate classified at 
that level. The nine bands and their descriptive statements are as follows: 

9 Expert User - Has fully operational command of the language: appropriate, accurate and 
fluent with complete understanding. 

8 Very Good User - Has fully operational command of the language with only occasional 
unsystematic inaccuracies and inappropriacies. Misunderstandings may occur in 
unfamiliar situations. Handles complex detailed argumentation well. 

7 Good User - Has operational command of the language, though with occasional 
inaccuracies, inappropriacies and misunderstandings in some situations. Generally 
handles complex language well and understands detailed reasoning. 

6 Competent User - Has generally effective command of the language despite some 
inaccuracies, inappropriacies and misunderstandings. Can use and understand fairly 
complex language, particularly in familiar situations. 

5 Modest User- Has partial command of the language, coping with overall meaning in 
most situations, though is likely to make many mistakes. Should be able to handle basic 
communication in own field. 

4 Limited User - Basic competence is limited to familiar situations. Has frequent problems 
in understanding and expression. Is not able to use complex language. 

3 Extremely Limited User - Conveys and understands only general meaning in very 
familiar situations. Frequent breakdowns in communication occur. 

2 intermittent User - No real communication is possible except for the most basic 
Information using isolated words or short formulae in familiar situations and to meet 
immediate needs. Has great difficulty understanding spoken and written English. 

1 Non User - Essentially has no ability to use the language beyond possibly a few 
isolated words. 

0 Did not attempt the test - No assessable information provided. 


7 





GTE 4 Golden Tips of English 


Introduction 

HARKING THE PRACTICE TESTS 

Listening and Reading 

The answer keys are on pages 121-128. 

Each question in the Listening and Reading tests is worth one mark. 

Questions which require letter/Roman numeral answers 

0 For questions where the answers are letters or Roman numerals, you should write only 
the number of answers required. For example, if the answer is a single letter or numeral 
you should write only one answer. If you have written more letters or numerals than are 
required, the answer must be marked wrong. 

Questions which require answers in the form of words or numbers 
° Answers may be written in upper or lower case. 

’ Words in brackets are optional - they are correct, but not necessary. 

° Alternative answers are separated by a slash (/). 

a If you are asked to write an answer using a certain number of words and/or (a) 

number(s), you will be penalised if you exceed this. For example, if a question specifies 
an answer using NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS and the correct answer is ‘black 
leather coat’, the answer ‘coat of black leather’ is incorrect. 

* In questions where you are expected to complete a gap, you should only transfer the 
necessary missing word(s) onto the answer sheet. For example, to complete ‘in the ...’, 
where the correct answer is ‘mprning’, the answer ‘in the morning’ would be incorrect. 

0 All answers require correct spelling (including words in brackets). 

* Both US and UK spelling are acceptable and are included in the answer key. 
a All standard alternatives for numbers, dates and currencies are acceptable. 

* All standard abbreviations are acceptable. 

* You will find additional notes about individual answers in the answer key. 

Writing 

The sample answers are on pages 129-136. It is not possible for you to give yourself a mark 
for the Writing tasks. We have provided sample answers (written by candidates), showing 
their score and the examiner’s comments. These sample answers will give you an insight 
into what is required for the Writing test. 


8 








GTE-''Golden Tips" of English 


Introduction 


HOW SHOULD YOU INTERPRET YOUR SCORES? 

At the end of each Listening and Reading answer key you will find a chart which will help 
you assess whether, on the basis of your Practice Test results, you are ready to take the 

IELTS test, . 

In interpreting your score, there are a number of points you should bear in mind. Your 
performance in the real IELTS test will be reported in two ways: there will be a Band Score 
from 1 to 9 for each of the components and an Overali Band Score from 1 to 9; which 
is the average of your scores in the/our components. However, institutions considering 
your application are advised to look at both the Overall Band Score and the Bands for 
each component in order to determine whether you have the language skills needed for a 
particular course of study or work environment. For example, if you are applying for a course 
which involves a lot of reading and writing, but no lectures, listening skills might be less 
important and a score of 5 in Listening might be acceptable if the Overall Band Score was 7. 
However, for a course which has lots of lectures and spoken instructions, a score of 5 in 
Listening might be unacceptable even though the Overall Band Score was 7. 

Once you have marked your tests, you should have some idea of whether your listening 
and reading skills are good enough for you to try the IELTS test. If you did well enough in 
one component, but not in others, you will have to decide for yourself whether you are ready 
to tsks the test 

The Practice Tests have been checked to ensure that they are of approximately the same 
level of difficulty as the real IELTS test. However, we cannot guarantee that your score in the 
Practice Tests will be reflected in the real IELTS test. The Practice Tests can only give you 
an idea of your possible future performance and it is ultimately up to you to make decisions 
based on your score. 

Different institutions accept different IELTS scores for different types of courses. We have 
based our recommendations on the average scores which the majority of institutions accept. 
The institution to which you are applying may, of course, require a higher or lower score than 
most other institutions. 

Further information 

For more information about IELTS or any other Cambridge Assessment English examination, 
write to: 

Cambridge Assessment English 
The Triangle Building 
Shaftesbury Road 

Cambridge , 

CB2 8EA 
United Kingdom 

https://support.cambridgeenglish.org 

http://www.ielts.org 


9 











GTE-*-' Golden- Tips ef Englishl 1 i 


Test 1 


LISTENING 


SECTIONS Questions 1-10 

Complete the form below. 

Write ONE WORD ANB/OR A NUMBER for each answer. 


CRIME REPORT FORM 

Type of crime: 

theft 

Personal information 


Example 


Name 

Louise. Taylor . 

Nationality 

1... 

Date of birth 

14 December 1977 

Occupation 

interior designer 

Reason for visit 

business (to buy antique 2 ) 

Length of stay 

two months 

Current address 


Details of theft 


Items stolen 

- a wallet containing approximately 4 £ 


- a 5. 

Date of theft 

6 ... 


Possible time and place of theft 

Location outside the 7...at about 4 pm 

Details of suspect - some boys asked for the 8.then ran off 

- one had a T-shirt with a picture of a tiger 

- he was about 12, slim build with 9.hair 

Crime reference number allocated 

10.....1. 


10 




























GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening 


S E C'TIO N 2 Questions 11 -20 

Induction talk for new apprentices 
Questions 11 and 12 
Choose TWO letters, A-E. 

Which TWO pieces of advice for the first week of an apprenticeship does the manager give? 

A get to know colleagues 
B learn from any mistakes 
C ask lots of questions 
D react positively to feedback 
E enjoy new challenges 


Questions 13 and 14 
Choose TWO letters, A~E. 

Which TWO things does the manager say mentors can help with? 

A confidence-building 
B making career plans 
C completing difficult tasks 
D making a weekly timetable 
E reviewing progress 


11 




GTE>- Golden Ti-p-s of' Engl: 


i s h : :t —i >-- *■ ■ ■ 


il,, 


m IV: 




Test 1 

Questions 15-20 

What does the manager say about each of the following aspects of the company policy 
for apprentices? 

Write the correct letter, A, B or C, next to Questions 15-20. 

A It is encouraged. 

B There are some restrictions. 

C It is against the rules. 


Company policy for apprentices 

15 Using the internet . 

16 Flexible working . 

17 Booking holidays .. 

18 Working overtime . 

19 Wearing trainers .. 

20 Bringing food to work 






12 

















GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening 


SECTION 3 Questions 21-30 

Questions 21-25 

Choose the correct letter, A, B or C. 

Cities built by the sea 

21 Carla and Rob were surprised to learn that coastal cities 

A contain nearly half the world’s population. 

B include most of the world's largest cities. 

C are growing twice as fast as other cities. 

22 According to Rob, building coastal cities near to rivers 

A may bring pollution to the cities. 

B may reduce the iand available for agriculture. 

C may mean the countryside is spoiled by industry. 

23 What mistake was made when building water drainage channels in Miami in 
the 1950s? 

A There were not enough of them. 

B They were made of unsuitable materials. 

C They did not allow for the effects of climate change. 

24 What do Rob and Carla think that the authorities in Miami should do immediately? 

A take measures to restore ecosystems 
B pay for a new flood prevention system 
C stop disposing of waste materials into the ocean 

25 What do they agree should be the priority for international action? 

A greater coordination of activities 
B more sharing of information 
C agreement on shared policies 


13 






GTE- 'Golden Tips '-of English) > 


Test 1 

Questions 26-30 

What decision do the students make about each of the following parts of their 
presentation? 

Choose FIVE answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-G, next to 
Questions 26-30. s 

Decisions 
A use visuals 
B J<eep it short 
C involve other students 
D check the information is accurate 

E provide a handout 

F focus on one example 
G do online research 


Parts of the presentation\ 

26 Historical background 

27 Geographical factors 

28 Past mistakes 

29 Future risks 

30 International implications 


14 








GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening 

SECTSOM 4 Questions 31-40 

Complete the notes below. 

Write ONE WORD ONLY for each answer. 

Marine renewable energy (ocean energy) 

Introduction 

More energy required because of growth in population and 31. 

What’s needed: t 

a renewable energy sources 

01 methods that won’t create pollution 

Wave energy 

Advantage: waves provide a 32.source of renewable energy 

Electricity can be generated using offshore or onshore systems 

Onshore systems may use a reservoir 

Problems: 

« waves can move in any 33. 

« movement of sand, etc. on the 34.of the ocean may be affected 

Tidal energy 

Tides are more 35.than waves 

Planned tidal lagoon in Wales: 

• will be created in a 36.at Swansea 

® breakwater (dam) containing 16 turbines 

• rising tide forces water through turbines, generating electricity 

° stored water is released through 37.. driving the turbines in 

the reverse direction 

Advantages: 

« not dependent on weather 

o no 38.is required to make it work 

« likely to create a number of 39. 

Problem: 

• may harm fish and birds, e.g. by affecting 40.and building up silt 

Ocean thermal energy conversion 

Uses a difference in temperature between the surface and lower levels 
Water brought to the surface in a pipe 


15 




















GTE- Golden Tips-i ; c>f English) '1 




Test 1 


READING 


SECTION 1 Questions 1-14 

Read the text below and answer Questions 1-6. 

TRA^SITIOH CAHE F01 THE ELOES1LY 

What Is transition care? 

Transition care is for older people who have been receiving medical treatment, but 
need more help to recover, and time to make a decision about the best place for 
them to live in the longer term. You can only access transition care directly from 
hospital. 

Transition care is focused on individual goals and therapies and is given for a 
limited time only. It offers access to a package of services that may include: 

® low-intensity therapy such as physiotherapy (exercise, mobility, strength and 
balance) and podiatry (foot care) 

63 access to a social worker 

® nursing support for clinical care such as wound care 
® personal care. 

Who provides transition care services? 

Transition care is often provided by non-government organisations and is subsidised 
by the government. If your circumstances allow, it is expected you'll contribute to 
the cost of your care. 

Daily care fees are set by the organisation that provides your transition care services 
(your service provider). They should explain these fees to you, and the amount 
charged should form part of the agreement between you and the service provider. 
The fee is calculated on a daily basis. 

Where do I receive transition care? r . 

Transition care is provided in your own home or in a 'live-in' setting. This setting 
can be part of an existing aged-care home or health facility such as a separate wing 
of a hospital. 

What if I'm already receiving services through a different programme? 

If you're already receiving subsidised residential care in an aged-care home, but you 
need to go somewhere else fop transition care, your place in the aged-care home 
will be held until you return. 









GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


Questions 1-6 

Do the following statements agree with the information given in the text on page 16? 

In boxes 1-6 on your answer sheet, write 

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information 

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information 
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this 

1 Only hospital patients can .go on to have transition care. 

2 Transition care may be long term or short term. 

3 Everyone receiving transition care must contribute to the cost. 

4 Transition care at home is only available for patients who live alone. 

5 Transition care may be given on a hospital site. 

6 You may lose your place in a care home if you have to leave it to receive 
transition care. 


£• 


17 




GTE- ''Golden Tips of English 


Test 1 


Read the text below and answer Questions 7-14. 

CAB1M BAGS FOR MR TRAVEL 

If you want a small bag with wheels that you can take onto the plane with you, there’s 
a wide choice. Here are some of the best. 

A The Flyer B3 is an ultra-lightweight cabin bag which can withstand some pretty 
harsh treatment. Its nylon and polyester sides won't rip or burst open if it's 
dropped or thrown whilst in transit. However, the trolley handle feels quite thin 
and flimsy. The top carrying handle is hard and flat, and the side handle isn’t easy 
to grip. 

B The Lightglide has two externa! pockets, both of which are zipped and lockable, 
but the inside pocket does not zip. In tests, we found the contents remain dry 
when given a good soaking, even around the zips. The trolley handle has a choice 
of two heights and the plastic hand grip doesn't have any sharp ridges that'll 
make your hands sore. For carrying there are fabric handles at the top and side. 

C The Foxton is easy to control across most surfaces. However, the zips don't always 
run smoothly especially around the corners, so you may have to give them a good 
tug, especially if the case is very full. This is definitely one to avoid if you're going 
somewhere rainy as it lets loads of water in, and documents in the pockets will 
also get pretty wet unless they're in plastic folders. 

D The Skybag has a single external zipped pocket and another located inside the 
lid. Your clothes are kept in place by two adjustable straps, The zips, are easy to 
grip and they run smoothly around the case. However, this cabin bag felt a little 
heavy to pul! on all but smooth floors, and it was hard to steer compared with 
some of the other suitcases. 

E The Travelsure 35 is available in a huge range of fabric designs including leopard 
print or lipstick kisses. The retractable trolley handle is comfortable but can't be 
adjusted to suit users of different heights. There's no internal divider, but there are 
two handy zipped pockets in the lid. We test each bag by letting it fall onto a hard 
floor - and our results show that you'll have to treat this bag with great care if you 
want it to last. The fabric tore so badly at one of the corners that it was unusable. 








GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Questions 7-14 

The text on page 18 has five paragraphs, A-E. 

Which paragraph mentions the following? 

Write the correct letter, A-E, in boxes 7—14 on your answer sheet. 

NB You may use any letter more than once. 

7 The zips on this cabin bagmay be difficult to use. 

8 This cabin bag may be badly damaged if it is dropped. 

9 The handles of this cabin bag have a number of different problems. 

10 This cabin bag is very resistant to water. 

11 There’s a good choice of patterns for the fabric of this cabin bag. 

12 This cabin bag isn’t very easy to move around. 

13 This cabin bag has just one internal zipped pocket. 

14 The trolley handle of this cabin bag is adjustable. 



Reading 


19 




GTE 5 - Golden- Tips of -EndVish 


Test 1 


SECTION 2 Questions 15-27 

Read the text below and answer Questions 15-20. 

College car parking policy - staff 

Parking permits and tickets 

Staff permits are required to park a motor vehicle (other than a motorcycle parked in the 
cycle bays) on campus between 8.30 am and 4.30 pm, Monday to Friday, during term 
time. Annual permits can be purchased from the Hospitality Department. Application 
forms can be downloaded from the College website. All permits/tickets must be clearly 
displayed in the windscreen of vehicles during the dates of term time, as published in 
the academic calendar. Please inform the Services Administrator of any changes to 
registration details on telephone ext. 406. Annual car parking permits can be purchased 
from 20th September and are valid for one academic year from 1st October to 30th June. 
The annual charges for car parking are displayed on the application form. 

Enforcement 

The nominated contractor will issue fixed Penalty Charge Notices (see below) on vehicles 
that fail to display a valid permit and/or parking ticket, or vehicles that are parked on 
yellow lines or in disabled parking bays without displaying a blue disabled-parking permit. 
Reductions of parking space availability may arise in order to accommodate College 
recruitment activities and/or estate development/maintenance projects. Vehicles that are 
in breach of the policy will be issued with a Penalty Charge Notice. 

Penalty Charge Notice (PCN) 

The PCN is £30, increasing to £60 seven days after issue. The nominated contractor is 
responsible for the collection of unpaid PCNs and may use legal action where necessary 
to recover unpaid PCNs. If issued with a PCN, appeals must'be taken up directly with 
the parking enforcement company (details included on the notice) not the college. 

Disabled parking 

The college has designated car parking spaces for disabled car drivers. The college will 
make all reasonable efforts to ensure these parking spaces are used only by drivers who 
display their blue disabled-parking permits, and a valid pay-and-display or annual permit, 
as appropriate. 

If issues arise concerning the availability of the parking spaces, those concerned should raise 
the matter with the Domestic Services Department in order to effect a temporary solution. 


20 




GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


Visitors 

The College welcomes visitors and provides parking arrangements through pre¬ 
arranged permits, which must be displayed in the vehicle. Please contact the Hospitality 
Department for further information. On Open Days, sections of car parking on campus 
may be reserved for visitors. 

Short-term drop-off/pick-up provision 

There will be two short-term drop-off/pick-up spaces for users of the nursery, with a 
maximum often minutes’ waiting time allowed. These are located outside Concorde 
Building. The nursery staff bays nfay not be used under any circumstances. 


21 






1 


GTE- Golden Tips ! of English) ' ?i 


Test 1 

Questions 15-2.0 
Answer the questions below. 

Choose NO MORE THAN THREE WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the text for 
each answer. 

•;> 

Write your answers in boxes 15-20 on your answer sheet. 

15 Where can you buy parking permits at the college? 

16 Which document shows the dates of term time? 

17 What is the start date of annual parking permits? 

18 Who is responsible for giving out parking fines if you park in the wrong place? 

19 What do visitors need to show when parking? 

20 Where can the nursery pick-up point be found? 



22 







GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


Read the text below and answer Questions 21-27. 

Maternity benefits 

If you are expecting a baby, there are a number of benefit schemes that could help you 
financially. However, eligibility differs for each individual scheme. 

Statutory Maternity Pay (SMP) 

You may be entitled to Statutory Maternity Pay (SMP) from your employer. This is a 
weekly payment, to help make it easier for you to take time off, both before and after the 
birth of your baby. SMP can be paid for up to 39 weeks. 

You are entitled to SMP if you have been employed by the same company for at least 
26 weeks by the end of the 15th week before your baby is due. You must also be 
earning an average of at least £87 per week (before tax). The amount you get depends 
on how much you earn. For 6 weeks, you will receive 90% of your average weekly 
earnings. Then you will receive £112.75 per week for the remaining 33 weeks. 

Maternity Allowance (MA) 

Maternity Allowance (MA) is available to those who are employed or self-employed 
but not eligible for Statutory Maternity Pay (SMP). You may be entitled to Maternity 
Allowance if you have been employed or self-employed for at least 26 weeks in the 
66 weeks before you are due to give birth. You don't have to work for the same employer 
for those 26 weeks. You also don’t have to work full weeks (as a part week counts as a 
full week) during the same period. Maternity Allowance can be paid for up to 39 weeks, 
and is either paid at the same standard rate as SMP or 90% of your average weekly 
earnings. You’ll receive whichever amount is the lower. You can find Maternity Allowance 
forms at antenatal clinics throughout the country. 

Child Tax Credit 

If you’re on a low income, over 16, and are responsible for at least one child, you may 
also be entitled to Child Tax Credit. The amount you get will depend on your personal 
circumstances and income. When your income is being assessed, any child benefit, 
maintenance payments or Maternity Allowance payments will not be classed as income. 
This means that it will not be taken into account when calculating your Child Tax Credit. 

Sure Start Maternity Payments * 

If you get benefits or Child Tax Credit because you’re on a low income, then you may be 
entitled to Sure Start Maternity Payments. These are individual grants to help towards 
the cost of a new baby. 


23 







GTE- Golden Tips of English 


-T'd iT'vTT. 


Test 1 

Questions 21-27 
Answer the questions below. 

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the text for 
each answer. 

Write your answers in boxes 21-27 on your answer sheet. 

21 What is the minimum period you must have worked for an employer in order to be 
eligible for SMP? 

22 For how long is SMP payable every week as a percentage of your average weekly 
earnings? 

23 What sum is payable every week as the second part of SMP entitlement? 

24 What is the maximum length of time MA is payable? 

25 Where can MA forms be obtained? 

26 Apart from income, what else is considered when assessing how much Child Tax 
Credit is paid? 

27 What are Sure Start Maternity Payments? 






24 











GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


SECTION 3 Questions 28-40 
Questions 28-32 

The text on pages 26 and 27 has five sections, A-E. 

Choose the correct heading for each section from the list of headings below. 

Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 28-32 on your answer sheet. 

List of Headings 
i Solving the puzzle of a papyrus document 

11 The importance of written records and different ways of recording them 

iii The use of papyrus for a range of purposes 

iv Suggestions for future possibilities for papyrus 

v How papyrus was cultivated and different manufacturing methods 

vi The decline of papyrus use 

vii The preservation and destruction of papyrus documents 

viii The process of papyrus production 


28 Section A 

29 Section B 

30 Section C 

31 Section D 

32 Section E 


& 


25 















GTE- Golden ":ps‘Of English 


i . lTlV. 


Testl 


PAPYRUS 

Used by the ancient Egyptians to make paper, the papyrus plant has 
helped to shape the world we live in 

A Libraries and archives are cultural crossroads of knowledge exchange, where 
the past transmits information to the present, and where the present has the 
opportunity to inform the future. Bureaucracies have become the backbone of 
civilizations, as governments try to keep track of populations, business transactions 
and taxes. At a personal level, our lives are governed by the documents we 
possess; we are certified on paper literally from birth to death. And written 
documentation carries enormous cultural importance: consider the consequences 
of signing the Foundation Document of the United Nations or the Convention on 
Biological Diversity. 

Documentation requires a writing tool and a surface upon which to record the 
information permanently. About 5,000 years ago, the Sumerians started to use 
reeds or sticks to make marks on mud blocks which were then baked, but, despite 
being fireproof, these were difficult to store. Other cultures used more flexible 
but less permanent surfaces, including animal skins and wood strips. In western 
culture, the adoption of papyrus was to have a great impact. Sheets of papyrus not 
only provide an invaluable record of people’s daily lives, they can also be dated 
using carbon-dating techniques, giving precise information about the age of the text 
written on them. \ 

B Papyrus is strongly associated with Egyptian culture, although all the ancient 
civilizations around the Mediterranean used it. The papyrus sedge is a tall grass¬ 
like plant. It was harvested from shallow water and swamplands on the banks of the 
River Nile. Manufacturing sheets of papyrus from papyrus sedge was a complex, 
messy process. Pith from inside the plant’s stem was cut into long strips that were 
laid side by side. These were then covered with a second layer of strips which were 
laid at right angles to the first, then soaked in water and hammered together. The 
sheet was then crushed to extract the water, dried and then polished to produce a 
high-quality writing surface. Individual sheets could be glued together and rolled up 
to make scrolls or folded and bound to form books. 

t 

C In moist climates the cellulose-rich sheets of papyrus would readily decay, 
becoming covered by mould or full of holes from attacks by insects. But in dry 
climates, such as the Middle East, papyrus is a stable, rot-resistant writing surface. 
The earliest known roll of papyrus scroll was found in the tomb of an official called 
Hemeka near Memphis, which was then the capital city of Egypt, and is around five 
thousand years old. in 79CE, nearly 2,000 papyrus scrolls in the library of Julius 
Caesar’s father-in-law were protected at Herculaneum by ash from the catastrophic 


From Stephen Harris, What have Plants Ever Done for Us?, Bodleian Library Publishing 2015. Reprinted by kind permission of Bodleian 
Library Publishing. 


26 







Tips of English 


Reading 


eruption of Mount Vesuvius. However, the most famous discoveries of papyrus 
have come from the rubbish dumps of the ancient town of Oxyrhynchus, some 
160km south-west of Cairo, in the desert to the west of the Nile. Oxyrhynchus 
was a regional administrative capital and for a thousand years generated vast 
amounts of administrative documentation, including accounts, tax returns and 
correspondence, which was periodically discarded to make room for more. Over 
time, a thick layer of sand covered these dumps, and they were forgotten. But 
the documents were protected by the sand, creating a time capsule that allowed 
astonishing glimpses into the lives of the town's inhabitants over hundreds of years. 

Collections of documents that record information and ideas have frequently been 
viewed as potentially dangerous. For thousands of years, governments, despots 
and conquerors have resorted to burning libraries and books to rid themselves of 
inconvenient evidence or obliterate cultures and ideas that they found politically, 
morally or religiously unacceptable. One such calamity, the burning of the Great 
Library of Alexandria, and the papyrus scrolls and books it contained, has been 
mythologized and has come to symbolize the global loss of cultural knowledge. 

D Besides their use in record-keeping, papyrus stems were used in many other 
aspects of Mediterranean life, such as for boat construction and making ropes, 
sails and baskets, as well as being a source of food. In 1969 the adventurer Thor 
Heyerdahl attempted to cross the Atlantic from Morocco in the boat Ra, to show 
that it was possible for mariners in ancient times to cross the Atlantic Ocean. Ra 
was made from bundles of papyrus stems and modelled on ancient Egyptian craft. 
As a marshland plant, papyrus sedge stabilizes soils and reduces erosion, while 
some investigations show that it has potential for water puiification and sewage 
treatment. 

E True paper was probably invented in China in the first century CE. Like papyrus, 
it was constructed from a meshwork of plant fibres, but the Chinese used fibres 
from the white mulberry tree, which yielded a tough, flexible material that could be 
folded, stretched, and compressed. The adoption of this paper by western cultures 
soon rendered papyrus obsolete. 

Despite dreams of paper-free societies, western cultures still use enormous 
quantities of paper, often in ways that it would be inconceivable to use papyrus for. 
As a paper substitute, the role of the papyrus sedge in western cultures has been 
superseded; papyrus is little more than a niche product for the tourist market. What 
makes papyrus noteworthy for western societies nowadays is its use as the surface 
upon which our ancient ancestors recorded their lives, their art and their science. 

In the words of the ancient Roman philosopher Pliny the Elder, it is ‘the material on 
which the immortality of human beings depends’. 


From Stephen Harris, What have 
Library Publishing. 


Plants Ever Done for Us?, Bodleian Library Publishing 2015. Reprinted by kind permission of Bodleian 







GTE- Golden Tips''of English. 


Test 1 

Questions 33-37 

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D, 

Write the correct letter in boxes 33—37 on your answer sheet. 

33 What was the problem with using animal skins and wood strips for writing on? 

A They did not last for a long time. 

B They were not easy to store. 

C They were insufficiently flexible. 

D They could be destroyed by fire. 

34 Why did papyrus manufacturers hammer the papyrus? 

A to remove water from the pith strips 
B to join the iayers of pith strips together 
C to allow the pith strips to be easily cut 
D to position the layers of pith strips at the correct angle 

35 When referring to burning libraries and books, the writer is suggesting that 

A information can be used for harm as well as for good. 

B new ways must be found to ensure information is not lost. 

C cultural knowledge depends on more than written texts. 

D those in power may Wish to keep others in ignorance. 

36 The writer refers to Thor Heyerdahl to illustrate the point that 

A papyrus could be used as a food on long sea voyages. 

B the ancient Egyptians already had advanced navigation skills. 

C papyrus could be used to build boats for long sea journeys. 

D the ancient Egyptians knew of the environmental benefits of papyrus. 

37 What does the writer conclude about papyrus today? 

i 

A It is better for the environment than using paper, 

B Its significance is restricted to its role in the past. 

C It is still the best writing surface for some purposes. 

D More efforts need to be made to ensure it stays in use. 


28 




GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 

Questions 38-40 
Complete the summary below. 

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the text for each answer. 

Write your answers in boxes 38-40 on your answer sheet. 

How papyrus documents have survived 

Papyrus is rich in cellulose and in some conditions will be destroyed by fungal growths 

or be consumed by 38.However, it can survive for long periods in an 

environment that is dry. It has been found in a 5,000-year-old 39.in 

Egypt, and in Herculaneum many papyrus documents were preserved following a huge 

40.in 79 CE. In the town of Oxyrhynchus, unwanted administrative 

documents were left on rubbish dumps which were covered with sand, preserving them 
for many years. 


29 









GTE-Golden TlpsTdT English) ! 


Test 1 



WRITING TASK 1 

You should spend about 20 minutes on this task. 

You have seen an advertisement in an Australian magazine for someone to 
live with a family for six months and look after their six-year-old child. 

Write a letter to the parents. In your Setter 

s explain why you would like the job 

• flf'Vo details of why you would be a suitable person to employ 
9 say how you would spend your free time while you are in Australia 

Write at least 150 words. 

You do NOT need to write any addresses. 

Begin your letter as follows: 

Dear Sir or Madam, 




30 









GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Writing 

WRITHING TASK 2 

You should spend about 40 minutes on this task. 

Write about the following topic: 

The growth of online shopping will one day lead to all shops in towns and 
cities closing. 

Do you agree or disagree? 

Give reasons for your answer and include any relevant examples from your, own 
knowledge or experience. 

Write at least 250 words. 




31 








GTE- Go 1 d : e ri ■T1 ps of English] '' ETT,- r--To 


Test 1 


SPEAKING 


PART 1 

The examiner asks the candidate about him/herself, his/her home, work or studies and 
other familiar topics. 

EXAMPLE 

Future 

• What job would you like to have ten years from now? [Why?] 

• How useful will English be for your future? [Why/Why not?] 

• How much travelling do you hope to do in the future? [Why/Why not?] 

° How do you think your life will change in the future? [Why/Why not?] 

PART 2 


Describe a book that you enjoyed reading because 
you had to think a lot. 

You should say: 

what this book was 

why you decided to read it 

what reading this book made you think about 

and explain why you enjoyed reading this book. 


You will have to talk 
about the topic for one 
to two minutes. You 
have one minute to 
think about what you 
are going to say. You 
can make some notes 
to help you if you wish. 


PART 3 

Discussion topics: 

Children-and reading 

Example questions: < 

What are the most popular types of children’s books in your country? 

What are the benefits of parents reading books to their'children? 

Should parents always let children choose the books they read? 

Electronic books 

Example questions: 

How popular are electronic books are in your country? 

What are the advantages of parents reading electronic books (compared to 
printed books)? 

Will electronic books ever completely replace printed books in the future? 


32 










GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Test 2 


LISTENING 


SECTION 1 Questions 1-10 

4 

Complete the notes below. 

Write ONE WORD AND/OR A NUMBER for each answer. 

TOTAL HEALTH CLINIC 

PATIENT DETAILS 
Personal information 
Example 

Name Julie Anne 


,1992 


Life Insurance 

Details of the problem 

Type of problem pa in in her left 5. 

When it began 6.ago 

Action already taken has taken painkillers and applied ice 


Other information 

Sports played belongs to a 7.. club 

goes 8.regularly 

Medical history injured her 9.last year 

no allergies 


no regular medication apart from 10 


Contact phone 
Date of birth 
Occupation 
Insurance company 


1 . 

2 . 

works as a 3 
4. 























GTE- Golden T : os c f "Erig-1 ish| 1 ' 


Test 2 

i SECTSOM 2 Questions 11-20 

Questions 11-15 
Choose the correct letter, A, B or C. 

Visit to Branley Castle 

11 Before Queen Elizabeth I visited the castle in 1576, 

A repairs were carried out to the guest rooms. 

B a new building was constructed for her. 

C a fire damaged part of the main hall. 

12 In 1982, the castle was sold to 

A the government. 

B the Fenys family. 

C an entertainment company. 

13 In some of the rooms, visitors can 

A speak to experts on the history of the castle. 

B interact with actors dressed as famous characters. 
C see models of historical figures moving and talking. 

14 In the castle park, visitors can 

A see an 800-year-old tree. 

B go to an art exhibition. 

C visit a small zoo. 

15 At the end of the visit, the group will have 

A afternoon tea in the conservatory. 

B the chance to meet the castle’s owners. 

C a photograph together on the Great Staircase. 



34 



GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening 


Questions 16-20 
Label the plan below. 

Write the correct letter, A-H, next to Questions 16-20. 



16 Starting point for walking the walls 

1 7 Bow and arrow display 

18 Hunting birds display 

19 Traditional dancing 

20 Shop 


35 





















































GTE-*-' Golden 'Tips of English 


r 'i 


T:= : f 


Test 2 


SECTIOM 3 Questions 21-30 

Questions 21-24 

Choose the correct letter, A, B or C. 

Woolly mammoths on St Paul’s Island 

21 How will Rosie and Martin introduce their presentation? 

A with a drawing of woolly mammoths in their natural habitat 
B with a timeline showing when woolly mammoths lived 
C with a video clip about woolly mammoths 

22 What was surprising about the mammoth tooth found by Russell Graham? 

A It was still embedded in the mammoth’s jawbone. 

B It was from an unknown species of mammoth. 

C It was not as old as mammoth remains from elsewhere. 

23 The students will use an animated diagram to demonstrate how the mammoths 

A became isolated on the island. 

B spread from the island to other areas. 

C coexisted with other animals on the island. 

24 According to Martin, what is unusual about the date of the mammoths’ extinction on 
the island? 

A how exact it is 

B how early it is 

C how it was established 



36 












GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening 

Questions 25-30 

What action will the students take for each of the following sections of their 
presentation? 

Choose SIX answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-H, next to 
Questions 25-30. 

Actions 

A make it more interactive 

B reduce visual input 

C add personal opinions 

D contact one of the researchers 

E make detailed notes 

F find information online 
G check timing 

H organise the content more clearly 


Sections of presentation 

25 Introduction 

26 Discovery of the mammoth tooth 

27 Initial questions asked by the researchers 

28 Further research carried out on the island 

29 Findings and possible explanations 

30 Relevance to the present day 


37 















GTE- 1 Golden Tips of "English 


Test 2 

f S E C TIO M 4 Questions 31-40 

Complete the notes below. 

Write ONE WORD ONLY for each answer. 

The history of weather forecasting 

Ancient cultures 

many cultures believed that floods and other disasters were involved in the 
creation of the world 

•> many cultures invented 31.and other ceremonies to make the 

weather gods friendly 

° people needed to observe and interpret the sky to ensure their 32. 

° around 650 BC, Babylonians started forecasting, using weather phenomena 
such as 33... 

° by 300 BC, the Chinese had a calendar made up of a number of 
34.connected with the weather 

Ancient Greeks 

s a more scientific approach ■ 

• Aristotle tried to explain the formation of various weather phenomena 

° Aristotle also described haloes and 35. 

MidciSe Ages 

s Aristotle’s work considered accurate 

• many proverbs, e.g. about the significance of the colour of the 

36., passed on accurate information. 

15th-19th centuries 

• 15th century: scientists recognised value of 37..for the first time 

3 Galileo invented the 38. 

• Pascal showed relationship between atmospheric pressure and altitude 

" from the 17th century, scientists could measure atmospheric pressure and 
temperature 

3 18th century: Franklin identified the movement of 39... 

• 19th century: data from different locations could be sent to the same 

place by 40... 


38 














GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 



SECTS OM 1 Questions 1-14 

Read the text below and answer Questions 1-7. 

Fiwe r@wi@w$ of the Wellington Hotel 

A My husband and t first stayed at the Wellington a few years ago, and we’ve 

returned every year since then. When we arrive and check in, we’re always treated 
like old friends by the staff, so we very much feel at home. Our one disappointment 
during our last visit was that our room overlooked the car park, but that didn’t spoil 
our stay. 

B The hotel hardly seems to have changed in the last hundred years, and we prefer 
that to many modem hotels, which tend to look the same as each other. The 
Wellington has character! Our room was very comfortable and quite spacious. We 
can strongly recommend the breakfast, though we had to wait for a table as the 
hotel was so full. That was a bit annoying/and there was also nowhere to sit in 
the lounge. \ 

C We made our reservation by phone without problem, but when we arrived the 
receptionist couldn't see it on the computer system. Luckily there was a room 
available. It wasn’t quite what we would have chosen, but it was a pleasure to sit in 
it with a cup of tea, and look out at the swimmers and surfers in the sea. 

D We’d be happy to stay at the Wellington again. Although there’s nothing special 
about the rooms, the view from the lounge is lovely, and the restaurant staff were 
friendly and efficient. Breakfast was a highlight - there was so much on offer we 
could hardly decide what to eat. We’d stay another time just for that! 

E The staff all did their jobs efficiently, and were very helpful when we asked for 
information about the area. The only difficulty we had was making our reservation 
online - it wasn’t clear whether payment for our deposit went through or not, and 
I had to call the hotel to find out. Still, once we'd arrived, everything went very 
smoothly, and we had a delicious dinner in the restaurant. 


39 









GTE- 1 ' Golden Tips ; of ■ English 


Test 2 

Questions 1-7 

Look at the five online reviews of the Wellington Hotel, A~E, on page 39. 
Which review mentions the following? 

Write the correct letter, A-E, in boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet. 

MB You may use any letter more than once. 

1 liking the view from the bedroom window 

2 finding the receptionists welcoming 

3 being pleased with the bedroom 

4 becoming confused when booking a room 

5 being impressed by the wide choice of food 

6 staying in the hotel regularly 

7 finding it inconvenient that the hotel was crowded 



40 






GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 

Read the text below and answer Questions 8-14. 

Come and play walking football or walking netball 

Walking football and netball have become increasingly popular in recent years, but do you 
know you can take part in this area? The names make it clear what they are — two of the 
country’s favourite sports where, instead of running, the players walk. It’s as simple as that. 

Walking football was invented in the UK in 2011, but it was a 2014 TV commercial for a 
bank, showing it providing financial support to someone who wanted to set up a website 
for the game, that brought it to people’s attention. Since then, tens of thousands of people - 
mostly, though not only, over the age of 50 - have started playing, and there are more than 
800 walking football clubs. Both men and women play walking football, but at the moment 
the netball teams consist only of women. However, men are beginning to show an interest 
in playing. 

The two games are designed to help people to be active or get fit, whatever their age and level 
of fitness. In particular, they were invented to encourage older men and women to get more 
exercise, and to give them a chance to meet other people. Regular physical activity helps 
to maintain energy, strength and flexibility. You can start gently and do a little more each 
session. The benefits include lower heart rate and blood pressure, greater mobility, less fat 
and more muscle. 

Many players have given up a sport — either through age or injury — and can now take it up 
again. They’re great ways for people to enjoy a sport they used to play and love, and keep 
active at the same time, though people who have never played the standard game before are 
also very welcome. 

The local council’s Active Lifestyles Team runs sessions at all the council’s leisure centres. 
Come alone or with a friend, and enjoy a friendly game on Monday or Saturday afternoons, 
or Tuesday or Thursday evenings. Each session costs £3 per person, and you don’t have to 
come regularly or at the same time each week. Our aim is to set up netball and football clubs 
as soon as there are enough regular players. 


41 




GTE-' Golden- Tips-' o j f English 


Test 2 

I Questions 8-14 

Do the following statements agree with the information given in the text on page 41? 

In boxes 8-14 on your answer sheet, write 

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information 

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information 

MOT GIVEN if there is no information on this 

8 Walking football became well-known when a club featured in a TV programme 
about the sport. 

9 The majority of walking netball players are men. 

10 Most clubs arrange social activities for their members. 

11 Players are tested regularly to measure changes in their fitness. 

12 People who have never played football are encouraged to play walking football. 

13 People can take part in the Active Lifestyles Team’s sessions whenever they wish. 

14 The Active Lifestyles Team intends to start clubs in the future. 



42 





s of English 


Reading 


SECTION! 2 Questions 15-27 

Read the text below and answer Questions 15-20. 

Dress regulations at work 

Your contract may state that you need to dress in a certain manner or wear a uniform. 

Your contract might also state that you need to dress ‘smartly’, rather than specifying any 
particular garments. As you might Well have conflicting ideas of what counts as smart, 
you should ask your employer for clarification. Many employers that have a strict dress 
code choose to provide clothing or a discount on clothing. However, this is not necessarily 
compulsory for the employer and is a factor you need to consider when taking a job. 

Protective clothing and equipment 

Your employer can tell you to put on protective clothing and equipment (such as gloves, a 
visor, boots, etc.). If you don’t, your employer is entitled to take disciplinary action, which 
can include excluding you from the workplace. 

You are required to: 

° co-operate with your employer on health and safety 

. correctly use work items provided by your employer, including protective equipment, in 
accordance with instructions 

° not interfere with or misuse anything provided for your health and safety or welfare. 

Of course, any protective gear has to fit and be appropriate for the situation. It shouldn’t 
cause you pain. If it does, you should negotiate alternative equipment or arrangements. 

Don’t be put off. Sometimes employers can, out of caution, interpret health and safety rules 
unnecessarily rigidly. And of course you shouldn’t be required to pay for any protective 
equipment or clothing that you need. However, if your employer buys the gear, they are 
entitled to keep it when you leave. 

The obligation to maintain protective clothing lies with the employer. The employer is also 
required to provide an appropriate storage space to keep the protective equipment in when it 
is not being used. And finally, the employer must provide the equipment and service free of 
charge to the employee. 

Jewellery 

Banning employees from wearing jewellery and loose clothing may be justified to prevent a 
potential hygiene hazard if you work in areas of food production or areas which need to be 
kept sterile. 

Likewise, your employer can judge that loose jewellery may constitute a snagging hazard 
if you operate machinery. If you think restrictions are not justified by health and safety 
concerns, talk to your workplace union rep if you have one, as they may know of solutions to 
the problem which other employees have used before. 









G"F.--Gb' ccr: Tip-sGoif English 


. •"I J 


m L 


Test 2 


I Questions 15-20 

Complete the sentences below. 

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the text for each answer. 

Write your answers in boxes 15-20 on your answer sheet. 

15 if employees are unsure what their company wishes them to wear for work, they 

should request. 

16 Some companies offer their employees a.when they buy items to 

wear for work. 

17 Employees who fail to wear protective clothing when required coufd be subject to 

..procedures. 

18 Employees ought not to be in.because of protective clothing or 

equipment. 

19 It is the company's responsibility to ensure that there is a suitable place for the 
.of protective equipment. 

20 Employees who work with certain types of.may have to remove 

jewellery to avoid potential injuries. 



44 










GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 

Read the text below and answer Questions 21-27. 

How to achieve a better work-life balance 

As more and more employees work from home full time and everyone has 24/7 access to email, 
balancing work and family may not seem like an easily attainable goal. So how can you juggle the 
demands of both worlds? Below are some tips to help you get started. 

Its easy to get sucked into habits tliat.rnake us less efficient without realizing it - like keeping 
your social media page open at work so you don’t miss something "important’. Draw up a list 
with all the activities that don’t enhance your life or career. Then minimize the time you spend 
on them. 

It’s hard to say no’, especially to a supervisor or loved one, but sometimes that powerful little 
word is essential. Learn to use ‘no’ judiciously and it will become a powerful tool in balancing 
work and family. 

Research shows that exercise helps you remain alert. Finding time to hit the gym may be hard, 
but it will ultimately help you get more things done because exercise really boosts energy and 
improves your ability to concentrate. 

Study after study shows that significant sleep deprivation affects your health and well-being. 
Exposure to electronics can significantly negatively impact your sleep, so try to unplug an hour 
before you go to sleep. 

What would you do if you had a whole day to yourself with no demands on your time? While 
most people don’t have the luxury of a whole day dedicated to relaxation, constantly putting off 
that downtime and putting everyone’s needs before yours will wear you down. Pick a time to 
do something just for you. Even just a few minutes of‘me time’ a day will help to recharge your 
batteries. 

Don’t assume your family and manager are aware of your concerns. If you feel you have to adjust 
your schedule to discover a better work-life balance, then voice that requirement. If that means 
asking your boss for permission to leave a few minutes early once a week so you can hit that yoga 
class on the way home, do it. 

All new habits require time to build, so if you find yourself sneaking your smartphone to bed, 
that’s okay. Leave your phone downstairs tomorrow night. Tiny steps are the key to finding that 
balance, so start small, and go from there. Most of all, know your limitations and what works 
best for you; then decide what really matters, what advice you want to follow, and prioritize. 


45 




GTE- 1 Golden Tips ' of: English 


'1 


Test 2 

Questions 21-27 
Complete the notes below. 

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the text for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 21-27 on your answer sheet. 


Achieving a better work-life balance 

How to begin 

© Make a complete 21.of things that are not helpful and reduce 

involvement in them 

© Refuse some requests as this can be a useful 22 .in gaining a 

better work-life balance 

Things that can help 
© Regular exercise 

-■ can increase 23.. .significantly 

© Sleep 

- insufficient sleep can make people ill 

- avoid focusing on 24.in the lead-up to bedtime 

issues that require attention 

© Those who see other people's 25.as more important than 

their own will suffer 

® If the working day is too long, get 26.to shorten it occasionally 

® People should learn to recognise their own 27 . 


46 














GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


SECTION 3 Questions 28-40 

Read the text below and answer Questions 28-40. 

San Francisco’s Golden Gate Bridge 

A For several decades in the nineteenth century, there were calls to connect the 

rapidly growing metropolis of San Francisco to its neighbours across the mile-wide 
Golden Gate Strait, where San Francisco Bay opens onto the Pacific Ocean. 
Eventually, in 1919, officials asked the city engineer, Michael O'Shaughnessy, to 
explore the possibility of building a bridge. He began to consult engineers across 
the USA about the feasibility of doing so, and the cost. Most doubted whether a 
bridge could be built at all, or estimated that it would cost $100 million. However, 
a Chicago-based engineer named Joseph Strauss believed he could complete 
the project for a modest $25 to $30 million. After his proposal was accepted, 
Strauss set about convincing the communities on the northern end of the strait 
that the bridge would be to their benefit, as well as to that of San Francisco. With 
population centres growing fast, there was severe traffic congestion at the ferry 
docks, and motor vehicle travel by ferry was fast exceeding capacity. 

B The bridge could not be constructed without the agreement of the US War 

Department, which owned the land on each side pf the Strait and had the power 
to prevent any harbour construction that might affect shipping traffic, in 1924, 

San Francisco and Marin counties applied for a permit to build a bridge, and after 
hearing overwhelming arguments in favour of the project, the Secretary of War 
agreed. 

Despite the economic benefits promised by its supporters, the project met fierce 
resistance from a number of businesses - particularly ferry companies - and civic 
leaders. Not only would the bridge be an obstacle to shipping and spoil the bay's 
natural beauty, they argued, it wouldn't survive the sort of earthquake that had 
devastated the city in 1906. Eight years of legal actions followed as opponents 
tried to prevent it from being built. 

C Meanwhile, Strauss's team scrapped their original plans in favour of a suspension 
span capable of moving more than two feet to each side: this would withstand 
strong wind far better than a rigid structure. They also planned the two towers, 
and decided on a paint colour they called 'international orange'. 

D O'Shaughnessy, Strauss and the Secretary to the Mayor of San Francisco 

believed a special district needed to be created, with responsibility for planning, 
designing and financing construction. The formation of this district would enable 
all the counties affected by the bridge to have a say in the proceedings. This 
happened in 1928, when the California legislature passed an act to establish the 
Golden Gate Bridge and Highway District, consisting of six counties. In 1930, 
residents voted on the question of whether to put up their homes, their farms 
and their business properties as security for a $35 million bond issue to finance 
construction. The outcome was a large majority in favour. 


47 






GT'E-i- Go": den -Tips 1 Of ' English 




Test 2 


i 


However, the District struggled to find a financial backer amid the difficulties 
of the Great Depression, a problem made worse by years of expensive legal 
proceedings. Now desperate, Strauss personally sought help from the President 
of Bank of America, who provided a crucial boost by agreeing to buy $6 million 
in bonds in 1932. 

E Construction began in January 1933, with the excavation of a vast amount of 
rock to establish the bridge’s two anchorages - the structures in the ground that 
would take the tension from the suspension cables. The crew consisted of virtually 
anyone capable of withstanding the physical rigours of the job, as out-of-work 
cab drivers, farmers and clerks lined up for the chance to earn steady wages as 
ironworkers and cement mixers. 

The attempt to build what would be the first bridge support in the open ocean 
proved an immense challenge. Working from a long framework built out from the 
San Francisco side, divers plunged to depths of 90 feet through strong currents 
to blast away rock and remove the debris. The framework was damaged when it 
was struck by a ship in August 1933 and again during a powerful storm later in the 
year, setting construction back five months. 

F The two towers were completed in June 1935, and a New Jersey-based company 
was appointed to handle the on-site construction of the suspension cables. Its 
engineers had mastered a technique in which individual steel wires were banded 
together in spools and carried across the length of the bridge on spinning wheels. 
Given a year to complete the task, they instead finished in just over six months, 
having spun more than 25,000 individual wires into each massive cable. 

The roadway was completed in April 1937, and the bridge officially opened to 
pedestrians the following month. The next day, President Roosevelt announced its 
opening via White House telegraph. 

G The Golden Gate has endured as a marvel of modern engineering; its main span 
was the longest in the world for a suspension bridge until 1981, while its towers 
made it the tallest bridge of any type until 1993. It withstood a destructive 
earthquake in 1989 and was closed to traffic only three times in its first 75 years 
due to weather conditions. Believed to be the most,photographed bridge in the 
world, this landmark was named one of. the seven civil engineering wonders of the 
United States by the American Society of Civil Engineers in 1994. 


48 




GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Questions 28-35 

The text on pages 47 and 48 has seven sections, A-G. 

Which section mentions the following? 

Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 28-35 on your answer sheet. 
NB You may use any letter more, than once. 

j 

28 why it was easy to recruit workers to build the bridge 

29 a change in the design of the bridge 

30 opposition to building the bridge 

31 why a bridge was desirable 

32 problems with raising funding for the bridge 

33 permission being given to build the bridge 

34 which records the bridge broke 

35 the idea that building a bridge might be impossible 


Reading 


49 








GTE - 1 Golden Tips of English 


Test 2 

j Questions 36-40 

Complete the sentences below. 

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the text for each answer. 

Write your answers in boxes 36—40 on your answer sheet. 

30 Building the bridge required a.issued by the Secretary of War. 

37 One objection to building the bridge was that another.would 

destroy it. 

38 Construction was delayed when the framework was damaged by a ship and again 

by a.. 

39 The last part of the bridge to be constructed was the. 

48 The bridge was first used by..in May 1937. 



50 












GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Writing 



WRITING TASK 1 

You should spend about 20 minutes on this task. 

You have just read an article in an international travel magazine which 
contained some information about your town that is incorrect. 

Write a letter to the editor of the magazine. In your letter 
« correct the information in the article 

• explain why it is important for the magazine to give correct information 
® suggest what the magazine should do about this situation 

Write at least 150 words. 

You do NOT need to write any addresses. 

Begin your letter as follows: 

Dear Sir or Madam, 


£■ 


51 






GTF. i Golden Tips of English 


Test 2 

WRITING TASK 2 

You should spend about 40 minutes on this task. 

Write about the following topic: 

Some people think its better to choose Mends who always have the same 
opinions as them. Other people believe it’s good to have friends who 
sometimes disagree with them. 

Discuss both these views and give your own opinion. 


Give reasons for your answer and include any relevant examples from your own 
knowledge or experience. 

Write at least 250 words. 




52 









GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Speaking 


SPEAKING 


PART 1 

The examiner asks the candidate about him/herself, his/her home, work or studies and 
other familiar topics. 

EXAMPLE 

t 

Social media 

8 Which social media websites'do you use? 

• How much time do you spend on social media sites? [Why/Why not?] 

° What kind of information about yourself have you put on social media? [Why/Why not?] 
» Is there anything you don’t like about social media? [Why?] 

PART 2 


You will have to talk 
about the topic for one 
to two minutes. You 
have one minute to 
think about what you 
are going to say. You 
can make some notes 
to help you if you wish. 


Do you think it is very expensive to make a home look nice? 
Why don’t some people care about how their home looks? 


Describe something you liked very much which 
you bought for your home. 

You should say: 

what you bought 

when and where you bought it 

why you chose this particular thing 

and explain why you liked it so much. 


PART 3 

Discussion topics; 

Creating a nice home 
Example questions: 

Why do some people buy lots of things for their home? 


Different types of home 


Example questions: 

In what ways is living in a flat/apartment better than living in a house? 

Do you think homes will look different in the future? 

Do you agree that the kinds of homes people prefer change as they get older? 


53 









LISTENING 


GTfc^'' Golden Tips of' English) ’ ! 


Test 3 


SECTION 1 Questions 1-10 

Complete the notes below. 

Write ONE WORD AND/ORA NUMBER for each answer. 

Flanders Conference Hotel 

Example 

Customer Services Manager:. 6M?.k . 

Date available 

* weekend beginning February 4th 

Conference facilities 
8 the 1.room for talks 

(projector and 2. ; .available) 

* area for coffee and an 3.... 

° free 4...throughout 

e a standard buffet lunch costs 5 $..per head 

Accommodation 

* Rooms will cost 6 $.including breakfast. 

r 

Other facilities 

* The hotel also has a spa and rooftop 7. 

6 There’s a free shuttle service to the 8. 

Location 

* Wilby Street (quite near the 9..) 

6 near to restaurants and many 10. 


54 






















GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening 

SECTION! 2 Questions 11-20 
Questions 11 and 12 
Choose TWO letters, A-E. 

Which TWO activities that volunteers do are mentioned? ■ 

A decorating 
B cleaning 
C delivering meals 
D shopping 
E childcare 


Questions 13 and 14 
Choose TWO letters, A-E. 

Which TWO ways that volunteers can benefit from volunteering are mentioned? 

A learning how to be part of a team 
B having a sense of purpose 
C realising how lucky they are 
D improved ability at time management 

E boosting their employment prospects 







GTE 4 - Golden Tips o f English 


Test 3 

j Questions 15-20 

What has each of the following volunteers helped someone to do? 

Choose SIX answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-G, next to 

Questions 15-20. 

What volunteers have helped people to do 
A overcome physical difficulties 
B rediscover skills not used for a long time 
C improve their communication skills 
D solve problems independently 
E escape isolation 
F remember past times 
G start a new hobby 


Volunteers 
15 Habib 
18 Consuela 

17 Minh 

18 Tanya 

19 Alexei 

20 Juba 


56 












GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening 

SECTION! 3 Questions 21-26 

Complete the notes below. 

Write ONE WORD AND/OR A NUMBER for each answer. 

Background on school marching band 

It consists of around 21.students. 

It is due to play in a 22..band competition. 

It has been invited to play in the town’s 23... 

They have listened to a talk by a 24. 

Joe will discuss a 25.with the band. 

Joe hopes the band will attend a 28.next month. 


& 


57 











GTE - 0 Golden Tips of English 




Test 3 

Questions 27-30 

What problem does Joe mention in connection with each of the following band 
members? 

Choose FOUR answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-F, next to 
Questions 27-30. 3 

Problems 

A makes a lot of mistakes in rehearsals 
B keeps making unhelpful suggestions 
C has difficulty with rhythm 

D misses too many rehearsals 

E has a health problem 
F doesn’t mix with other students 


Band members 

27 flautist 

28 trumpeter 

29 trombonist 

30 percussionist 



58 









GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening 

SECTION 4 Questions 31-40 

Complete the notes below. 

Write ONE WORD AND/OR A NUMBER for each answer. 

Concerts in university arts festival 

Concert 1 

® Australian composer: Liza Lim 

• studied piano and 31...before turning to composition 

» performers and festivals around the world have given her a lot of commissions 

a compositions show a great deal of 32.and are drawn from 

various cultural sources 

® her music is very expressive and also 33... 

s festival will include her 34.called The Oresteia 

■» Lim described the sounds in The Oresteia as 35.. 

9 British composers: Ralph Vaughan Williams, Frederick Delius 

Concert 2 

° British composers: Benjamin Britten, Judith Weir 

• Australian composer: Ross Edwards 

9 festival will include The Tower of Remoteness, inspired by nature 

• The Tower of Remoteness is performed by piano and 36. 

« compositions include music for children 

• celebrates Australia’s cultural 37. 

Concert 3 

• Australian composer: Car! Vine 

• played cornet then piano 

• studied 38.before studying music 

® worked in Sydney as a pianist and composer 

® became well known as composer of music for 39. 

• festival will include his music for the 1996 40. 

• British composers: Edward Elgar, Thomas Ades 


59 
















GTE ^'Golden Tips of English 


"i 


Test 3 


READING 


SECTION 1 Questions 1-14 

Read the text below an0 answer Questions 1~7. 

Your guide to entertainment in Westhaven 


A TRAX INDOOR KARTING CENTRE 

Experience the fun and thrills of indoor racing driving in our mini open-topped karts. 
No experience necessary. Individuals and groups welcome. Refreshments available 
in new burger bar. Spectators welcome. 

All drivers must meet the minimum height requirement of 5 feet (1.52 m), and 
participate at their own risk. 

Open: all year daily 10 am to 6 pm (later times by appointment) except 
Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, Boxing Day and New Year’s Day 

Charges: from £11 per person 


B WESTHAVEN LIFEBOAT MUSEUM 

The Westhaven Lifeboat Museum is an exciting display illustrating over 150 years 
of courage - photos with texts of epic rescues, models of lifeboats and video 
displays. Try our hands-on simulator - take charge of a daring rescue on a stormy 
sea. Ideal for school groups! A must for all ages. Souvenir shop. No charge for 
admission but donations welcome. 

Open: 25th March to 26th October, 10 am to 5 pm 
27th October to 2nd January, 10 am to 4 pm 


C STAR LEISURE CENTRE 

Exciting leisure complex with four pools, wave machine, two thrilling flumes, bubble 
pool, fitness suite, special programme for under-fives, organised holiday activities and 
much, much more! 

Open: all year daily 

Charges: Check our website atwww.starleisure.co.uk for current rates. 


60 











GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


D LLOYD'S LANES 

20 fuliy computerised ten-pin bowling lanes, amusement area, fast food area, 
large-screen Sky TV - Lloyd’s Lanes is ideal for a whole fun day out! 

Open: ten-pin bowling daily, 10 am till late - 7 days a week 

Charges: Monday to Friday 10 am to 6 pm: non-members £3.50; members £2.50 

other times: non-members £4.50; members £3.75 

appropriate footgear essential to protect bowling surfaces 

shoe hire £1.00 at all times 

> 


E WESTHAVEN GOLF CLUB 

Beautiful lakeside course; a pleasant, manageable walkthrough nine challenging 
holes. 24-bay driving range, suitable in rain, wind or sun; three golf professionals can 
give affordable coaching. Restaurant: good food served all day. Visitors welcome. 

Open: all year from 7.30 am to 10 pm 

Charges: 9 holes £10; 18 holes £15 


61 








GTE~ Golden Tips iff' English 


-■i 


Test 3 

j Questions 1-7 

The text on pages 60 and 61 has five advertisements labelled A-E. 
Which advertisement contains the following information? 

Write the correct letter A—E in boxes 1—7 on your answer sheet. 

MB You may use any letter more than once. 

1 Payment at this venue is optional. 

2 Expert instructors are available for lessons. 

3 There is a restriction on what you can wear. 

4 Some basic information is published in another piace, 

5 This has particular provision for very young children. 

6 It has a feature especially recommended for educational parties. 

7 They will open at unscheduled times if you make an arrangement. 

’i 





62 







GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


Read the text below and answer Questions 8-14. 

DO YOU HAVE A MUSIC PROJECT M MIND THAT 
MIGHT BENEFIT FROM FUNDING? 

Music is wonderfully therapeutic! This is recognised by The Dosoco Foundation, 
which supports local projects that use music for social good. 

The next round of Dosoco grantTunding will shortly be open for applications. 
Grants are available from £700 to £1,000 (for organisations) and up to £300 (for 
individuals) in the areas of music education (e.g. working with a talented music 
student with either physical, social or learning disabilities), music access (e.g. a 
music club for groups that might struggle to start something on their own), music 
innovation (e.g. using an electronic device such as Raspberry Pi to help disabled 
people make music) and music therapy (e.g. an idea for using music to support 
positive mental health). 

Case study 

Dosoco recently awarded a grant to Alexia Sloane, a young composer with sight 
loss, to enable her to attend the sound-and-music summer-school composition 
course at the Purcell School. Alexia has since gained a place as a composer with 
the National Youth Orchestra of Great Britain - the first blind composer to be 
appointed - and has aiso been awarded the title of Young Composer of the Year. 
She was the first female composer ever to receive this honour in its ten-year history. 

Organisations, families and individuals can apply by completing a simple form. 
Dosoco can contribute up to 50% towards project costs. Projects must be locally 
based and must be new ideas for using music to make a positive impact on people's 
lives where help is really needed. 

For more information please visit www.thedosocofoundation.org 


63 







GTE- Golden Tips of‘English 


Test 3 

Questions 8-14 

Do the following statements agree with the information given in the text on page 63? 

In boxes 8-14 on your answer sheet, write 

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information 

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information 
MOT GIVEN if there is no information on this 

8 You can apply to Dosoco now for grant funding. 

9 You can apply for a grant that will help to educate a musician. 

10 Alexia Sloane lost her sight after attending a summer-school composition course 

11 Alexia now plays several instruments with the National Youth Orchestra of 
Great Britain. 

12 Alexia has received an award for her work in music. 

13 Applications can be made by filling in an online form. 

14 In some cases Dosoco will cover the full cost of the project. 




64 






GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 

SECTION 2 Questions 15-27 

Read the text below and answer Questions 15-21. 

Guide to employees on workplace monitoring 

What is workplace monitoring? 

Employers have the right to monitor your activities in many situations at work. For 
example, your activities may be recorded on CCTV cameras, and your letters may 
be opened and read. In addition, your employer may use an automated software 
programme to check the emails you receive at work. Phone calls may be listened to 
and recorded, and the log of websites you use may be checked. 

All of these forms of monitoring are covered by data protection law. Data protection 
law doesn’t prevent monitoring in the workplace. However, it does set down rules 
about the circumstances and the way in which monitoring should be carried out. 

Before deciding whether to introduce monitoring, your employer should identify any 
negative effects the monitoring may have on staff. This is called impact assessment. 

Monitoring electronic communications at work 

Your employer can legally monitor your use of electronic communications in 
the workplace if the monitoring relates to the business and the equipment being 
monitored is provided partly or wholly for work. 

Except in extremely limited circumstances, employers must take reasonable steps to 
let staff know that monitoring is happening, what is being monitored and why it is 
necessary. 

As long as your employer sticks to these rules, they don’t need to get your consent 
before they monitor your electronic communications, but only if the monitoring is for 
specific reasons. These may be to establish facts which are relevant to the business 
or to check standards, for example, listening in to phone calls to assess the quality 
of your work. Monitoring is also allowed if its purpose is to prevent or detect crime. 

It may be necessary to make sure electronic systems are operating effectively, for 
example, to prevent computer viruses entering the system. Your employer is also 
allowed to listen in to any calls you make to confidential helplines, but in this case he 
or she is not allowed to record these calls. 










GTE ^'Golden Tipsi d f 'English! ^ 


f :d! 


x..g;:I f::T'TTv 


Test 3 

Questions 15-21 
Complete the notes below. 

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the text for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 15-21 on your answer sheet. 



Your employer may monitor you at work by checking 

° recordings of your activities 

0 your letters and IS. 

0 your phone calls and which websites you have visited 

Rules for monitoring are established by data protection law. This states that 

employers must carry out a procedure that is known as IS.before 

introducing monitoring. 

!n general, monitoring is legal if 
0 it relates to the business 

\ 

* you are using 17...intended for work 

» the worker has been informed 

Monitoring may be used 

* to evaluate the 18. 0 f your work 

e to stop or find out about 19. 

* to stop the possibility of 20.....affecting systems 

to check calls to 21.,.(these cannot be recorded) 


66 

























GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


Read the text below and answer Questions 22-27. 

International Experience Canada: 
application process 

If you want to travel and work temporarily in Canada as part of International Experience 
Canada (IEC), your first step is to become a candidate in one or more IEC pools. There 
are three categories of pool: Internationa! Co-op (Internship), Working Holiday and 
Young Professionals. 

To apply, first use our questionnaire to see if you meet the criteria to get into the IEC 
pools. This should take you about ten minutes. You can find it at www.cic.gc.ca/ctc-vac/ 
cometocanada.asp. After completing this, if you are eligible you will be sent a personal 
reference code, which you should use to create your online account. At the same 
time, you should fill in any remaining fields in your profile with the required information, 
including which IEC pools you want to be in. (Some parts will already have been 
completed for you.) 

If you are sent an invitation to proceed with your application, you will have 10 days to 
decide whether to accept this or not. If you accept, click the 'Start Application' button. 
You then have 20 days to complete your application. . 

For International Co-op and Young Professionals categories, your employer in Canada 
must pay the compliance fee and inform you of your offer of employment number. (This 
does not apply to the Working Holiday pool.) 

Once you have received this, you should then upload copies of police and medical 
certificates, if required. If you do not have these, you should upload proof that you have 
applied for them. You should then pay your participation fee of C$126 online by credit 
card. (There is an additional payment of C$100 if you are applying for the Working 
Holiday category.) 

Your application will then be assessed. You can apply to withdraw at this stage and will 
be given a refund if you do this within 56 days. If your application is successful, you 
will receive a letter of introduction which you can show to Immigration when you enter 
Canada. 


67 






GTE- Golden Tips- o'f ‘English 




Test 3 


Questions 22-27 
Complete the flow-chart below. 

Choose ONE WORD AND/OR A NUMBER ONLY from the text for each answer. 
Write your answers in boxes 22-27 on your answer sheet. 


Applying to international Experience Canada 



68 






















GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


SECTIOM 3 Questions 28-40 

Read the text below and answer Questions 28-40. 

RESEARCH ON IMPROVING AGRICULTURAL 
YIELDS IN AFRICA 

Three programmes are investigating ways of improving agricultural 

productivity in Africa. 

More than half of the global population growth between now and 2050 is expected to 
occur in Africa. And more people means a requirement for more food. 

Ethiopia, for example, has the largest livestock population in Africa but with a growing 
population even its 53 million cattle are not enough. And now efforts to develop farming 
there are bringing a significant health concern. Professor James Wood from the University of 
Cambridge explains that new breeds that are being introduced are more vulnerable to bovine 
TB (tuberculosis) than the zebu cattle which were previously reared there. ‘This may have 
health implications for those who work with and live alongside infected cattle, and also raises 
concerns about transmission to areas which previously had low levels of TB,’ he warns. 

Wood leads a research programme which is looking af the feasibility of control strategies, 
including cattle vaccination. The programme brings together veterinary scientists, 
epidemiologists, geneticists, immunologists and social scientists in eight Ethiopian 
and UK institutions. ‘We need this mix because we are not only asking how effective 
strategies will be, but also whether farmers will accept them, and what the consequences 
are for prosperity and wellbeing,’ says Wood. 

The impact that increasing productivity can have on farmers’ livelihoods is not lost on 
an insect expert at the University of Ghana, Dr Ken Fening, who is working on another 
food-related research project. Cabbages are not indigenous to Africa but have become 
a major cash crop for Ghanaian farmers and an important source of income for traders 
from markets and hotels. ‘A good crop can bring in money to buy fertilisers and farm 
equipment, and also help to pay for healthcare and education for the family,’ he says. 
Recently, however, fields of stunted, yellowing cabbages, then leaves curled and dotted 
with mould, have become a familiar and devastating sight for the farmers of Ghana. 

From his field station base in Kpong, Ghana, Fening works closely with smallholder 
farmers on pest-control strategies. Two years ago they started reporting that a new disease 
was attacking their crops. ‘It seemed to be associated with massive infestations of pink and 
green aphids*,’ says Fening, ‘and from my studies of the way insects interact with many 
different vegetables, I’m familial' with the types of damage they can cause.’ 

But farmers were typically seeing the total loss of then crops, and he realised that the 
devastation couldn’t just be caused by sap-sucking insects. Despite no previous reports of 
viral diseases affecting cabbage crops in Ghana, the symptoms suggested a viral pathogen. 


* aphids: small insects which feed by sucking liquid from plants 


69 






GTE-'-’Golden Tips ■ o'fi ’English 




Test 3 


Together with Cambridge plant biologist Dr John Carr, Fening collected samples of 
cabbage plants in Ghana showing signs of disease, and also aphids on the diseased 
plants. Back in Cambridge, Fening used screening techniques including a type of DNA 
‘fingerprinting’ to identify the aphid species, and sophisticated molecular biology 
methods to try to identify the offending virus. 

‘Aphids are a common carrier of plant-infecting viruses,’ explains Carr. ‘The “usual 
suspects” are turnip mosaic virus and cauliflower mosaic virus, which affect cabbages in 
Europe and the US.’ 

‘We found that two different species of aphids, pink and green, were generally found on 
the diseased cabbages,’ says Fening. Tt turned out this was the first record of the green 
aphid species ever being seen in Ghana.’ The pink aphid was identified as Myzus persicae 
(Sulzer). 

What’s more, the virus was not what they expected, and work is now ongoing to identify 
the culprit. The sooner it can be characterised, the sooner sustainable crop protection 
strategies can be developed to prevent further spread of the disease not only in Ghana, but 
also in other countries in the region. 

Another researcher who hopes that eradication strategies will be the outcome of her 
research project is Dr Theresa Manful. Like Fening, she is a researcher at the University 
of Ghana. She has been working with Cambridge biochemist Professor Mark Carrington 
on a disease known as trypanosomiasis. 

‘This is a major constraint to cattle rearing in Africa,’ she explains. ‘Although 
trypanosomiasis is also a disease of humans, the number of cases is low, and the 
more serious concerns about the disease relate to the economic impact on agricultural 
production.’ 

The parasite that causes the disease is carried by the tsetse fly, which colonises vast 
swathes of sub-Saharan Africa. Carrington says that a lot is now known about the 
parasite’s molecular mechanisms, in particular the way it evades the immune system of the 
animal acting as its host by altering the proteins in its coat so as to remain ‘invisible’. ‘But 
then when you look at the effect on large animals, you realise that there is almost no thin g 
known about the dynamics of an infection, and even whether an infection acquired at an 
early age persists for its lifetime,’ he says. So Manful and Carrington set about testing 
cattle in Ghana. They discovered that nearly all were infected most of the time. 

For Manful, one of the important gains has been the ability to expand the research in 
Ghana: ‘I now have a fully functional lab and can do DNA extraction and analysis in 
Ghana -1 don’t have to bring samples to Cambridge. We are teaching students from five 
Ghanaian institutions the diagnostic methods.’ 

‘Agriculture faces increasing challenges,’ adds Carr. ‘Bioscience is playing a crucial part 
in developing ways to mitigate pest impact and reduce the spread of parasites. We want to 
ensure not only that every harvest is successful, but also that it’s maximally successful.’ 


70 




GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


Questions 28-32 

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D. 

Write the correct letter in boxes 28-32 on your answer sheet 

28 What is the main problem faced by cattle farmers in Ethiopia, according to 
Professor Wood? 

A TB is being transmitted from people to cattle. 

B New breeds of cattle have led to an increase in TB. 

C The traditional breeds of cattle are being affected by TB. 

D TB has spread into places where it was previously unknown. 

29 When discussing the cultivation of cabbages in Ghana, the writer says that this crop 

A was introduced from outside Africa. 

B is not eaten much by local people. 

C is not grown correctly by many farmers. 

D requires the use of fertiliser and special equipment. 

30 Fening believed that the new disease destroying cabbages was 

A caused by overuse of pesticides. 

B also affecting other locally grown vegetables. 

C linked to insect attacks on these vegetables. 

D connected with the development of new insect breeds. 

31 Fening first suspected that the cabbage disease was caused by a virus because 

A evidence of viral disease could be seen on the cabbage leaves. 

B pink and green aphids did not commonly attack cabbages. 

C viral diseases affecting vegetables had occurred elsewhere in Africa. 

D aphids would not have caused so much damage to the crops. 

32 When doing further research in Cambridge, Fening and Carr discovered that 

A the virus was unfamiliar to them. 

B two different viruses were present. 

C the aphids’DNA was more complex than expected. 

D one aphid was more harmful than the other. * 


71 




GTE - i--GoTd:err' Tips > oif"E-nglis--h| '1 . i. 




Test 3 

Questions 33-36 

Look at the following statements (Questions 33—36) and the list of researchers below. 
Match each statement with the correct researcher, A-E. 

Write the correct letter, '’A-E, in boxes 33—36 on your answer sheet. 

MB You may use any letter more than once. 

33 A particular crop may make an important contribution to the local economy in one 
African country. 

34 Tests will be carried out by local people in the country where the research is 
focused. 

35 Different specialists must work together to ensure the success of a programme. 

36 One type of insect attacking plants in Ghana was previously unknown there. 


List of Researchers 

A 

James Wood 

B ' 

Ken Fening 

C 

John Carr 

D 

Theresa Manful 

E 

Mark Carrington 


72 










GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


Questions 37-40 
Complete the summary below. 

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the text for each answer. 

Write your answers in boxes 37-40 on your answer sheet.. 

Trypanosomiasis 

Trypanosomiasis is a disease caused by a parasite which is spread by an insect 

called the 37.The parasite can remain unaffected by the host’s 

38.because it is able to change the 39.on its 

outer covering. It is uncommon among humans but has been found to affect most 
40.in Ghana. 


73 










GTS - 1 Goldett Tip-s-' o j f English 


Test3 


WRITING 


WRITHING TASK 1 

You should spend abouf 20 minutes on this task. 

You recently did a short cookery course. The cookery school has asked for 
your feedback on this course. 

Write a letter to the course director at the cookery school. In your tetter 
a describe what you enjoyed about the course 

° say how much cooking you’ve done since the course 
0 suggest another cookery course you’d like the school to offer 

Write at least 150 words. 

You do NOT need to write any addresses. 

Begin your letter as follows: 

Dear Sir or Madam, 



74 









GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Writing 

WRITING TASK 2 

You should spend about 40 minutes on this task. 

Write about the following topic: 

Some people say the main way to be happy in life is to have a lot of money. 

How might having a lot of money make people happy? 

What other things in life caii make people happy? 

Give reasons for your answer and include any relevant examples from your own 
knowledge or experience. 

Write at least 250 words. 


75 






GTE - 1 Gol den-- T ips o'f -Engl i sh 


Test 3 


SPEAKING 


PART 1 


The examiner asks the .candidate about him/herself, his/her home, work or studies and 
other familiar topics. 

EXAMPLE 

Neighbours 

* How often do you see your neighbours? [Why/Why not?] 

° Do you invite your neighbours to your home? [Why/Why not?] 

» Do you think you are a good neighbour? [Why/Why not?] 
o Has a neighbour ever helped you? [Why/Why not?] 

PART 2 


You will have to talk 
about the topic for one 
to two minutes. You 
have one minute to 
think about what you 
are going to say. You 
can make some notes 
to help you if you wish. 


PART 3 

Discussion topics: 

Difficult jobs * 

Example questions: 

What are the most difficult jobs that people do? 

Why do you think some people choose to do difficult jobs? 

Do you agree or disagree that all jobs are difficult sometimes? 

Personal and career success 

Example questions: 

How important is it for everyone to have a goal in their personal life? 

Is it always necessary to work hard in order to achieve career success? 
Do you think that successful people are always happy people? 


Describe a very difficult task that you succeeded 
in doing as part of your work or studies. 

You should say: 

what task you did 

why this task was very difficult 

how you worked on this task 

and explain how you felt when you had 
successfully completed this task. 


76 








GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Test 4 


LISTENING 


SECTION 1 Questions 1-10 
Questions 1-7 

> 

Complete the notes below. 

Write ONE WORD AND/OR A NUMBER for each answer. 


Enquiry about booking hotel room for event 


Example 

Andrew is the. tEymte .Manager 


Rooms 
Adelphi Room 

number of people who can sit down to eat: 1. 

has a gallery suitable for musicians 

can go out and see the 2.in pots on the terrace 

terrace has a view of a group of 3. 

Carlton Room 

number of people who can sit down to eat: 110 

has a 4. 

view of the lake 

Options 

Master of Ceremonies: 


can give a S.while people are eating 

will provide 6.if there are any problems 


Accommodation: 

in hotel rooms or 7 




















GTE- Golden Tips-of English 


't 


i - 


Test 4 

I Questions 8-10 

What is said about using each of the following hotel facilities? 

Choose THREE answers from the box and write the correct letter, A, 8 or C, next to 
Questions 8-10. 

•> 

Availability 

A included in cost of hiring room 
B available at extra charge 
C not available 


Hotel facilities 

8 outdoor swimming pool 

9 gym 

10 tennis courts 


78 









GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening 

SECTION 2 Questions 11-20 

Questions 11-16 

What information does the speaker give about each of the following excursions? 

Choose SIX answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-H, next to 

Questions 11-16. 

Information 
A all downhill 
B suitable for beginners 
C only in good weather 
D food included 
E no charge 
F swimming possible 
G fully booked today \ 

H transport not included 


Excursions 

11 dolphin watching 

12 forest walk 

13 cycle trip 

14 local craft tour 

15 observatory trip 

16 horse riding 


79 













GTE- Go', den 


S' c f 


ish 


I ...:... r 




Test 4 

Questions 17 and 18 
Choose TWO letters, A-E. 

Which TWO things does the speaker say about the attraction called Musical Favourites '? 

A You pay extra for drinks. 

B You must book it in advance. 

C You get a reduction if you buy two tickets. 

D You can meet the performers. 

E You can take part in the show. 


Questions 19 and 20 
Choose TWO letters, A-E. 

Which TWO things does the speaker say about the Castle Feast7 

A Visitors can dance after the meal. 

B There is a choice of food. 

C Visitors wear historical costume. 

D Knives and forks are not used. 

E The entertainment includes horse races. 



80 







GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening 


SECTION 3 Questions 21-30 

Questions 21-25 

Choose the correct letter, A, B or C. 

21 What does Trevor find interesting about the purpose of children’s literature? 

A the fact that authors may not realise what values they’re teaching 
B the fact that literature can be entertaining and educational at the same time 

C the fact that adults expect children to imitate characters in literature 

22 Trevor says the module about the purpose of children's literature made him 

A analyse some of the stories that his niece reads. 

B wonder how far popularity reflects good quality. 

C decide to start writing some children’s stories. 

23 Stephanie is interested in the Pictures module because 

A she intends to become an illustrator. 

B she can remember beautiful illustrations from her childhood. 

C she believes illustrations are more important than words. 

24 Trevor and Stephanie agree that comics 

A are inferior to books. 

B have the potential for being useful. 

C discourage children from using their imagination. 

25 With regard to books aimed at only boys or only girls, Trevor was surprised 

A how long the distinction had gone unquestioned. 

B how few books were aimed at both girls and boys. 

C how many children enjoyed books intended for the opposite sex. 


81 




GTE-' Golden Tips- of English 


Test 4 

j Questions 26-30 

What comment is made about each of these stories? 

Choose FIVE answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-G, next to 
Questions 26-30. 

h’< 

Comments 

A translated into many other languages 
B hard to read 

C inspired a work in a different area of art 
D more popular than the author’s other works 
E original title refers to another book 
F started a new genre 
G unlikely topic 


Stories 

26 Perrault’s fairy tales 

27 The Swiss Family Robinson 

28 The Nutcracker and The Mouse King 

29 The Lord of the Rings 

30 War Horse 



82 













GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening 

SECTION 4 Questions 31-40 
Complete the notes below. 

Write ONE WORD ONLY for each answer. 

The hunt for sunken settlements and ancient shipwrecks 

ATLIT-YAM 

° was a village on coast of eastern Mediterranean 

• thrived until about 7,000 BC 

® stone homes had a courtyard 

® had a semicircle of large stones round a 31. 

3 cause of destruction unknown - now under the sea 
® biggest settlement from the prehistoric period found on the seabed 

• research carried out into structures, 32.and human remains 

TRADITIONAL AUTONOMOUS UNDERWATER VEHICLES (AUVs) 

® used in the oil industry, e.g. to make 33.. 

® problems: they were expensive and 34. 

LATEST AUVs 

• much easier to use, relatively cheap, sophisticated 
Tests: 

• Marzamemi, Sicily: found ancient Roman ships carrying architectural 

elements made of 35. 

Underwater internet: 

® 36.is used for short distance communication, acoustic 

waves for long distance 

« plans for communication with researchers by satellite 

® AUV can send data to another AUV that has better 37.. 

for example ,, 

Planned research in Gulf of Baratti: 

° to find out more about wrecks of ancient Roman ships, including 

- one carrying 38.supplies; tablets may have been used 

for cleaning the 39. 

- others carrying containers of olive oil or 40... 


83 
















GTE - 1 Golden Tips of'English 


n i 


Test 4 


REAPING 


SECTION 1 Questions 1-14 

Read the text below and answer Questions 1-8. 

The best travel wallets 

Keep all your bank cards, documents, passports and ID in one of these convenient 
carriers, which have been selected by Becca Meier. 

A Kipling Travel Doc Travel Document Holder 

This zip-around wallet comes in five different patterns and is made of nylon. It also 
has a space where users can put a pen, pockets for cards, an fD window and a 
pocket for change. 

B Lifeventure Mini Travel Document Wallet 

This is a waterproof wallet, which uses anti-RFID (radio frequency identification) 
material so your financial details will be safe. It is black with smart sky-blue 
finishing touches and has a small internal compartment, a smartphone pocket and 
an external pocket. It can fit two passports. 

C Cath Kidston Breton Stripe 

A wallet so slim it could easily pass for a small notebook. The inside compartment 
labels identifying each separate section all have silver lettering on them. The 
wallet has a special coating which makes it easy to wipe anything like sand off. 

D Ted Baker Voyager's Travel Wallet 

This wallet comes in smooth black leather, and is no bigger than a passport, but 
roomy enough for any insurance documents or flight tickets. A small navy-blue 
pen is supplied inside. 

E Radley Abbey Travel Wallet 

This plain travel wallet opens up to reveal pockets in various colours labelled 
'cards', 'passport' and 'tickets', as well as others left blank for extras. It comes in a 
handy drawstring bag. 

F Gotravel Organiser 

The black wallet features seven slip-in card compartments, two small interior zip 
pockets and a load of other slip-in compartments. It can fit at least four passports. 

G Gotravel Glo Travel Wallet 

This is a simple, very reasonably priced wallet. It is made of PVC plastic and will 
suit those who like a wallet that is easy to spot. It comes in a range of bright 
colours with a white holiday-related design on the front. It has five compartments 
that can fit a passport with other cards/tickets. 


84 













GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 

Questions 1-8 

Look at the seven reviews of travel wallets, A-G, on page 84. 

For which travel wallet are the following statements true? 

Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 1-8 on your answer sheet. 

NB You may use any letter more than once. 

.f 

1 This wallet will suit people who prefer natural materials. 

2 Users of this wallet do not need to worry about taking it out in the rain. 

3 Parts of the inside of this wallet have categories printed on them in one colour. 

4 This wallet would suit someone who needs to keep several passports together. 

5 Something is provided for writing. 

6 This will suit people who want to be able to find their document wallet easily in 
their luggage. 

7 Something to keep this wallet in is provided. 

8 This wallet has been specially made to prevent people detecting the numbers on 
any bank cards, etc, inside it. 


85 







GTE- 1 - Golden Tips of English 


Test 4 


Read the text below and answer Questions 9-14. 

UK rail services - how d© 1 claim for 
my delayed train? 

Generally, if you have been delayed on a train journey, you may be able to claim 
compensation, but train companies all have different rules, so it can be confusing to 
work out what you're entitled to. The type of delay you can claim for depends on whether 
the train company runs a Delay Repay scheme or a less generous, older-style scheme. 

Delay Repay is a train operator scheme to compensate passengers when trains are 
late, and the train company will pay out even if it was not responsible for the delay. 

The scheme varies between companies, but up to 2016 most paid 50 percent of the 
single ticket cost for 30 minutes’ delay and 100 percent for an hour. On the London 
Underground, you get a full refund for 15-minute delays. 

Companies that do not use Delay Repay and still use the older scheme will not usually 
pay compensation if the problem is considered to be out of their control. But it is still 
worth asking them for compensation, as some may pay out. You are unlikely to get 
compensation for a delay if any of the following occur: 

0 Accidents involving people getting onto the line illegally 

® Gas leaks or fires in buildings next to the line which were not caused by a train 
company > 

e Line closures at the request of the emergency services 
® Exceptionally severe weather conditions 
0 Strike action 

National Rail Conditions of Travel state that you are entitled to compensation in the 
same form that you paid for the ticket. Some train companies are still paying using rail 
vouchers, which they are allowed to do if you do not ask for a cash refund. 

, Since 2016, rail passengers have acquired further rights for compensation through 
the Consumer Rights Act. This means that passengers could now be eligible for 
compensation due to: a severely overcrowded train with.too few carriages available; a 
consistently late running service; and a service that is delayed for less than the time limit 
that applied under existing compensation schemes. 

However, in order to exercise their rights beyond the existing compensation schemes, 
for instance Delay Repay, and where the train operating company refuses to 
compensate despite letters threatening court action, passengers may need to bring their 
claims to a court of law. 


86 





GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 

Questions 9-14 

Do the following statements agree with the information given in the text on page 86? 

In boxes 9-14 on your answer sheet, write 

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information 

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information 

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this 

0 The system for claiming compensation varies from one company to another. 

10 Under Delay Repay, a train company will only provide compensation if it caused 
the delay. 

11 Under Delay Repay, underground and other train companies give exactly the same 
amounts of money in compensation. 

12 An increasing number of train companies are willing to pay compensation for 
problems they are not responsible for. 

13 It is doubtful whether companies using the older scheme will provide compensation 
if a delay is caused by a strike. 

14 Passengers may receive compensation in the form of a train voucher if they forget 
to request cash. 


87 









GTE^ Golden Tips of English 


Test 4 


SECTION 2 Questions 15-27 

Read the text below and answer Questions 15-19. 

Vacancy for food preparation assistant 

Durrant House pic runs restaurants and cafes as concessions in airports, train stations 
and other busy environments around the country. We currently have a vacancy for a 
food preparation assistant in our restaurant at Locksley Stadium, serving football fans 
and concert-goers before, during and after events, in addition, we cater for private 
parties several times a week. If you have relevant experience and a passion for 
preparing food to a very high standard, we’ll be delighted to hear from you. You must be 
able to multitask and to work in a fast-paced environment. It goes without saying that 
working as an effective and supportive member of a team is essential, so you need to be 
happy in this type of work. 

The role includes the usual responsibilities, such as treating hygiene as your number 
one priority, cleaning work areas, and doing whatever is required to provide food of 
excellent quality. The person appointed will carry out a range of tasks, including ensuring 
all raw food items are fresh, preparing vegetables to be cooked, making sure frozen 
food products are used in rotation, and throwing away any food products that are near or 
have passed their expiry date. He or she will be required to familiarise themselves with 
the storage system, so as to put food product supplies in the proper place and retrieve 
them in the right order. In particular; we are looking for someone with skill at baking, to 
play a large role in the production of pies and cakes. 

Given the nature of the venue, working hours vary from week to week, depending on 
the events being held, and will often involve starting early in the morning or finishing 
late at night. You can expect to work an average of around 18 hours a week, although 
this cannot be guaranteed. You will also have the opportunity to work in another of our 
sites for one or two days a week, or for longer periods, and will be paid for ten days of 
holidays a year. Training will be provided in food safety. 

If this sounds like the job for you, please contact Jo Simmons at 
simmons.j@durrant-house.com. 


88 




GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Questions 15-19 
Complete the notes below. 

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the text for each answer. 

Write your answers in boxes 15-19 on your answer sheet. 

Vacancy for food preparation assistant 

Location of restaurant: in a 15. 

Requirements: 

• relevant experience 

• ability to multitask 

• must enjoy working in a 16. 

Responsibilities include: 

• maintaining high standards of 17..and quality 

° checking the freshness of raw food 

» ensuring no food is used after its expiry date 

8 learning the procedure for the 18.of food 

° doing a considerable amount of the baking 

Conditions: 

8 working hours are not 19. 

■ payment is made for holidays 


Reading 


89 












GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Test 4 


Read the text below and answer Questions 20-27. 

Setting up a business partnership in the UK 

Two or more people can go into business together by setting up either a limited company 
or a partnership. A partnership is the easier way to get started, and simply links two or more 
people together in a simple business structure. Unlike a limited company, a partnership 
doesnt have a separate legal status. The partners are usually self-employed individuals, 
although a limited company counts as a ‘legal person’ and can also be a partner. 

In a partnership, you and your partner or partners personally share responsibility for your 
business. This means, among other things, that if your business cannot afford to pay its 
debts, you must pay them yourselves. Again, this is not the case with a limited company. 
Partners share the business’s profits, and each partner pays tax on their share. 

When you set up a business partnership you need to choose a name. You can trade 
under your own names, for example, ‘Smith and Jones’, or you can choose another 
name for your business. You don’t need to register your name. However, you should 
register your name as a trademark if you want to stop people from trading under your 
business name. 

Business partnership names must not include ‘limited’, ‘Ltd’, ‘limited liability partnership’, 
‘LLP’, ‘public limited company’ or ‘pic’, be offensive, or be the same as an existing 
trademark. Your name also can’t suggest a connection with government or local 
authorities, unless you get permission. There is no central database of partnership 
names in the UK, so to avoid using the same name as another business, it is advisable 
to search on the internet for the name you are considering. 

You must include all the partners’ names and the business name (if you have one) on 
official paperwork, for example invoices. 

You must choose a ‘nominated partner’ who is responsible for registering your 
partnership with HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC), the government department 
responsible for the collection of taxes. This person is responsible for managing the 
partnership’s tax returns and keeping business records. Alternatively, you can appoint an 
agent to deal with HMRC on your behalf. 

All partners need to register with HMRC separately and send their own tax returns as 
individuals. 

You must register by 5 October in your business’s second tax year, or you could be 
charged a penalty. 

You must also register for VAT if your VAT taxable turnover is more than £85,000. You 
can choose to register if it’s below this, for example to reclaim VAT on business supplies. 


90 







GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


Questions 20-27 

Complete the sentences below. 

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the text for each answer. 

Write your answers in boxes 20-27 on your answer sheet 

20 A partnership is different from a limited company in not having its own 
.as a legal body. 

21 The partners are personally responsible for paying all the partnership’s 

22 The partnership’s...are divided between the partners. 

23 Registering the partnership’s name prevents others from using that name 

when. 

24 The best way to find out if a name is already in use is to use the.... 

25 The names of the partners and the partnership must appear on. 

and other documents. 

26 You must have a nominated partner, or someone to act as your.. 

for all contact with HMRC. 

27 You will have to pay a.if you miss the deadline for registering the 

partnership. 


91 








GTE- 11 " Golden Tips of English 




Test 4 

SECTION 3 Questions 28-46 

Read the text below and answer Questions 28-40. 

THE ROLE OF THE SWISS POSTBUS 

Switzerland’s postbuses are much more than just a means of 
public transportation. 


The Swiss PostBus Limited is the largest of the 
country’s 78 coach companies. Administered 
by the Motor Services Department of the Post 
Office, it carries over 120 million passengers 
each year and is carefully integrated with other 
public transport services: trains, boats and 
mountain cableways. The Swiss transportation 
system resembles a tree, with the larger branches 
representing federal and private railways, the 
smaller branches being the coaches, and the 
twigs being the urban transit operators running 
trams, city buses, boats, chairlifts and so on. 

But the trunk that holds the tree together is the 
vast postbus network, without which the whole 
network would not function. 

There isn’t an inhabited place in Switzerland 
that cannot be reached by some sort of public 
transport. Federal law and the Swiss Constitution 
stipulate that every village with a population 
greater than 40 is entitled to regular bus services. 
The frequency of these services is directly 
related to population density. Timetables are 
put together four years in advance, and seldom 
change. If a new route is to be introduced, the 
population of the area affected is invited to vote 
in a referendum. 

At times, postbuses are the main - sometimes the 
only - links between settlements. These coaches, 
often with a trailer in tow to increase their 
capacity, are a common sight in high-altitude 
regions, and their signature sound — part of 
Rossini’s William Tell Overture., played by the 
drivers on three-tone post horns with electrical 


compressors at every road turn - is one of the 
most familiar Swiss sounds. 

The three-tone horns can still be used to ‘talk’ to 
post offices (and each other) from a distance. By 
altering the combination of the tones, a driver 
can announce ‘departure of post’, ‘arrival of post’, 
‘arrival of special post’, and so on — so much 
more romantic and often more reliable than 
radio or mobile phones. This musical ‘language’ 
started in the mid-nineteenth century, when 
the coach drivers could also blow their horns 
a certain number of times on approaching the 
station to indicate the number of horses needing 
to be fed, giving the stationmaster time to 
prepare the fodder. 

The postbus history goes back to 1849, when the 
Swiss postal service was made a monopoly. The role 
of today’s modern yellow buses was, back then, 
played by horse-drawn carriages (or in winter by 
sleighs, in order to travel on snow), which were 
the same colour. By 1914, eight years after the 
first motor coaches were introduced, there were 
still 2,500 horses, 2,231 coaches (or carriages) and 
1,059 sleighs in service. 

After the First World War, Swiss Post bought a 
fleet of decommissioned military trucks which 
were converted into postbuses, but it was not 
until 1961 that the last horse-drawn coach was 
replaced with a motorised version. 

Today, the Swiss Post Office boasts one of the 
worlds most advanced coach fleets, including 


92 




GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


fuel-cell models and the world’s first driverless 
bus. This was launched in 2015 in the town of 
Sion, the capital of the canton of Valais, one of 
the 26 cantons, or administrative regions, that 
make up die country. 

Postbuses often go to places that other means 
of transport cannot reach. Most of die drivers 
therefore see themselves as educators and tour 
guides. Although it’s not in their job description, 
they’re likely to point out the sights — waterfalls, 
gorges, and so on - and are always ready to pull 
over for a photo opportunity. 

Switzerland’s longest postbus journey, and one 
of the highest, crosses four mountain passes - an 
eight-hour trip undertaken by a single postbus. 
The route goes through several cantons; two 
languages (German and Italian); all four 
seasons - from burning sunshine to showers 
and heavy snowfalls; and countless places of 
interest. One of the passes, the Gotthard, is often 
described as ‘the People’s Road’, probably because 
it connects the German-speaking canton of Uri 
with Italian-speaking Ticino. Like Switzerland 
itself, postbuses ‘speak’ all four state languages: 
German, French, Italian and Romansh - and, 


by law, their automated intercom announcements 
are given in the language of whichever canton the 
bus is currently passing through. 

Irrespective of their previous driving experience, 
drivers undergo lots of training. During the first 
year, they have to drive postbuses under the 
supervision of a more experienced driver. Only 
after two years of safe driving in the valleys can 
they be pronounced ready for a mountain bus. 

Some routes are not at all busy, with the bus 
often carrying just two or three passengers at 
a time. But for most people living in small 
mountain villages, the postbus is of the utmost 
importance. It not only carries the villagers to 
town and back, it takes village children to and 
from school, delivers mail, transports milk from 
the village farms down to the valley, collects 
rubbish from the village (Swiss laws do not 
allow dumping anywhere in the mountains), 
and brings building materials to households. It 
takes elderly villagers to shops and carries their 
shopping up the hill to their homes. More a 
friend than just a means of transportation, for 
the dwellers of mountain villages the postbus is 
an essential part of life. 


93 






GTE- Golden'Tips c f English 


■| 


Test 4 

Questions 28-32 

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D. 

Write the correct letter in boxes 28-32 on your answer sheet. 

28 When comparing the Swiss transportation system to a tree, the writer emphasises 

A the size of the postbus system. 

B how competitive the postbus system is. 

C how important the postbus system is. 

D the threat to the postbus system. 

29 What is said about bus services in the second paragraph? 

A Villages have the chance to request more buses every four years. 

B New routes are often introduced to reflect an increase in population. 

C Bus timetables tend to change every four years. 

D The number of buses that call at a village depends on how many people 
live there. 

30 According to the fourth paragraph, what were three-tone horns first used to 
indicate? 

A how many coach horses required food 
B how long the bus would stay at the station 
C how many passengers wanted a meal 
D how soon the bus would arrive at the station 

31 What point does the writer make about the postbus drivers? 

A Many choose to give passengers information about the surroundings. 

B Most are proud of driving buses to places without other forms of 
transport. 

C They are required to inform passengers about the sights seen from 
the bus. 

D They are not allowed to stop for passengers to take photographs. 

32 What is said about the buses’ automated announcements? 

A They are given in the language of the bus’s starting point. 

B The language they are given in depends on where the bus is at the time. 
C They are always given in all the four languages of Switzerland. 

D The language they are given in depends on the bus’s destination. 


94 



GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Reading 


Questions 33-40 

Do the following statements agree with the information given in the text on pages 92 
and 93? 

In boxes 33-40 on your answer sheet, write 

TRUE if the statement agrees with the information 

FALSE if the statement contradicts the information 

NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this 

33 Some postbuses after the First World War were originally army vehicles. 

34 The, number of driverless buses has increased steadily since 2015. 

3§ On the longest postbus route in Switzerland, passengers have to change buses. 

36 The weather on the longest postbus route is likely to include extreme weather 
conditions. 

37 There is a widely used nickname for part of the longest route used by postbuses. 

38 Bus drivers’ training can be shortened if they have driven buses before joining 
PostBus. 

39 In some villages most passengers are school children. 

40 Buses carry only rubbish that can be recycled. 


95 







GTE ! - Golden Ti-ps 'of English 


Test 4 


WRITING 


WRITING TASK 1 

You should spend about 20 minutes on this task. 

You recently went to a concert and thought one of the singers was very good. 
You want to toil Mm how you feet. 

Write a fetter to the singer. In your fetter 
0 say how you fee! about his performance 
® give detaiis of your musical activities 

9 explain how you would like him to help you with your musical activities 

Write at least 150 words. 

You do NOT need to write any addresses. 

Begin your letter as follows: 

Dear .:.. 



96 











GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Writing 

WRITING TASK 2 

You should spend about 40 minutes on this task. 

Write about the following topic: 

Many people work long hours, leaving very little time for leisure activities. 

Does this situation have more advantages or more, disadvantages? 

> 

Give reasons for your answer and include any relevant examples from your own 
knowledge or experience. 

Write at least 250 words. 


97 





GTE- Golden' Tips of English 


'! 


Test 4 


speaking 


PART 1 

The examiner asks the candidate about him/herself, his/her home, work or studies and 
other familiar topics. 

EXAMPLE 

Your neighbourhood 

° Do you like the neighbourhood you live in? [Why/Why not?] 

0 What do you do in your neighbourhood in your free time? [Why/Why not?] 

0 What new things would you like to have in your neighbourhood? [Why/Why not?] 

® Wouid you like to live in another neighbourhood in your town or city? [Why/Why not?] 

PART 2 


Describe a website you have bough! something from. 

You should say: 

what the website is 

what you bought from this website 

how satisfied you were with what you bought 

and explain what you liked and disliked about using 
this website. 


You will have to talk 
about the topic for one 
to two minutes. You 
have one minute to 
think about what you 
are going to say. You 
can make some notes 
to help you if you wish. 


PART 3 

Discussion topics: 

Shopping online 
■ Example questions: 

What kinds of things do people in your country often buy from online shops? 

Why has online shopping become so popular in many countries? 

What are some possible disadvantages of buying things from online shops? 

Online retail businesses 
Example questions: 

Do you agree that the prices of all goods should be lower on internet shopping sites than 
in shops? 

Will large shopping malls continue to be popular, despite the growth of internet shopping? 
Do you think that some businesses (e.g. banks and travel agents) will only operate 
online in the future? 

98 










GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Audioscripts 


TEST 1 


SECTION 1 


officer: 

louise: 

officer: 

louise: 

officer: 

louise: 

officer: 

louise: 

officer: 

louise: 


officer: 

louise: 

officer: 

louise: 


officer: 

louise: 

louise: 


Good morning. What can. I do for you? 

I want to report a theft.! had some things stolen out of my bag yesterday. 

I’m sorry to hear that. Right, so I'll need to take a few details. Can I start with your 
name? 

Louise Taylor . Exam P le 

OK, thank you. And are you resident in the UK? 

No, I’m actually Canadian , though my mother was British. Q1 

And your date of birth? 

December 14th, 1977. 

So you’re just visiting this country? 

That's right. I come over most summers on business. I’m an interior designer and 
I come over to buy old furniture , antiques you know. There are some really lovely Q2 
things around here, but you need to get out to the small towns. I’ve had a really 
good trip this year, until this happened. 

OK. So you’ve been here quite a while? 

Yes, I'm here for two months. I go back next week. 

So may I ask where you’re staying now? 

Well at present I’ve got a place at Park Apartments, that’s on King Street. I was Q3 
staying at the Riverside Apartments on the same street, but the apartment there 
was only available for six weeks so I had to find another one. 

OK. And the apartment number? 

Fifteen. 

Right. 


officer: 

louise: 

officer: 

louise: 


officer: 

louise: 


officer: 

louise: 


Now, I need to take some details of the theft. So you said you had some things 
stolen out of your bag? 

That’s right. 

And were you actually carrying the bag when the theft took place? 

Yes. I really can’t understand it. I had my backpack on. And I went into a 
supermarket to buy a few things and when I opened it up my wallet wasn’t 
there. 

And what did your wallet have in it? 

Well, fortunately I don’t keep my credit cards in that wallet - i keep them with 
my passport in an inside compartment in my backpack. But there was quite a 
bit of cash there ... about £ 250 sterling, 1 should think. I withdrew"£300 from my Q4 
account yesterday, but I did a bit of shopping, so I must have already spent about 
£50 of that. 

OK. 

At first I thought, oh I must have left the wallet back in the apartment, but then 
I realised my phone had gone as well. It was only a week old, and that’s when Q5 
! realised I'd been robbed. Anyway at least they didn’t take the keys to my 
rental car. 


99 
















GTE r - Golden Tips of English 


"i 


Audioscripts 


officer: Yes. So you say the theft occurred yesterday? 

louise: Yes. 

officer: So that was September the tenth . And do you have any idea at ali of where or Q6 

when the things might possibly have been stolen? 
louise: Well at first I couldn’t believe it because the bag had been on my back ever since I 

left the apartment after lunch. It’s just a small backpack, but I generally use it when 
I'm travelling because it seems safer than a handbag. Anyway, I met up with a 
friend, and we spent a couple of hours in the museum . But I do remember that as Q7 
we were leaving there, at about 4 o’clock, a group of young boys ran up to us, and 
they were really crowding round us, and they were asking us what time it was, then Q8 
all of a sudden they ran off. 

officer: Can you remember anything about them? 

louise: The one who did most of the talking was wearing a T-shirt with a picture of 

something ... let’s see ... a tiger. 
officer: Right. Any idea of how old he might have been? 

louise: Around twelve years old? 

officer: And can you remember anything else about his appearance? 

louise: Not much. He was quite thin ... 

officer: Colour of hair? 

louise: I do remember that - he was blond . All the others were dark-haired. Q9 

officer: And any details of the others? 

louise: Not really. They came and went so quickly. 

officer: Right. So what I’m going to do now is give you a crime reference number so you 

can contact your insurance company. So this is ten digits: 87954 82361 . Q10 

louise: Thank you. So should I ... 


SECTION 2 

Good morning everyone. My name’s Janet Parker and I’m the human resources manager. 

We're very happy to welcome you to your new apprenticeship. I hope that the next six months 
will be a positive and enjoyable experience for you. 

I’d like to start with some general advice about being an apprentice. Most of you have very 
little or no experience of working for a big organisation and the first week or so may be quite 
challenging. There will be a lot of new information to take in but don’t worry too much about trying 
to remember everything. The important thing is to check with someone if you’re not sure what to Q11 
do - you’ll find your supervisor is very approachable and won’t mind explaining things or helping 
you out. You’re here to learn so make the most of that opportunity. You’ll be spending time in 
- different departments during your first week so make an effort to talk to as many people as Q 12 
possible about their work - you'll make some new friends and find out lots of useful information. 

As well as having a supervisor, you’ll each be assigned a mentor. This person will be someone 
who's recently completed an apprenticeship and you’ll meet with them on a weekly basis. Their 
role is to provide help and support throughout your apprenticeship. Of course, this doesn’t 
mean they’ll actually do any of your work for you - instead they’ll be asking you about what Q13 
goals you’ve achieved so far , as well as helping you to identify any areas for improvement . You 
can also discuss vour more long-term ambitions with them as well. Q14 


Now I just want to run through a few company policies for our apprenticeship scheme with 
you... Most importantly, the internet. As part of your job you’ll be doing some research online 
so obviously you'll have unlimited access for that but please don’t use it for personal use - Q15 

you’ll have your own phones for that. 

100 


























GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Test 1 


Some of you have already asked me about flexible working. After your probationary three- 
month period - some of you will be eligible for this - but it will depend on which department Q16 
you’re in and what your personal circumstances are . So please don’t assume you’ll 
automatically be permitted to do this. 

I want to make sure there's no confusion about our holiday policy. Apart from any statutory 
public holidays we ask that you don't book anv holidays until after vour six-month Q17 

apprenticeship has finished . Time off should only be taken if you are unwell. Please speak to 
your supervisor if this is going to be a problem. 

You’ll be expected to work a 40-hour week but there may be opportunities to do overtime 
during busy periods. Although you’re not required to do this, it can be a valuable experience Q18 
- so we advise you to take it up if possible . Obviously, we understand that people do have 
commitments outside work, so don’t worry if there are times when you are unavailable. 

As you know, we don’t have a formal dress code here - you may wear casual clothes as long 

as they’re practical - and the only restriction for shoes we have is on high heels for health. 

and safety reasons. Comfortable shoes like trainers are preferable . Q19 

There's a heavily subsidised canteen on site where you can get hot meals or salads cheaply. 
Snacks and drinks are also provided - so we've decided to introduce a no packed lunch Q20 
policy . This is partly to encourage healthy eating at work and partly to stop people from eating 
at their workstation, which is unhygienic. 

OK moving on to ... 


SECTION 3 


tutor: 


carla: 

rob: 


carla: 


carla: 


rob: 


carla: 

rob: 


rob: 


carla: 

rob: 

carla: 

rob: 


OK, so what I'd like you to do now is to talk to your partner about your 
presentations on urban planning. You should have done most of the reading 
now, so I’d like you to share your ideas, and talk about the structure of your 
presentation and what you need to do next. 

OK Rob. I’m glad we chose quite a specific topic - cities built next to the sea. It 
made it much easier to find relevant information. 

Yeah. And cities are growing so quickly - I mean, we know that more than half 
the world's population lives in cities now. 

Yeah, though that’s all cities, not just ones on the coast. But most of the biggest Q21 
cities are actually built bv the sea . I’d not realised that before. 

Nor me. And what’s more, a lot of them are built at places where rivers come out 
into the sea. But apparently this can be a problem. 

Why? 

Well, as the city expands, agriculture and industry tend to spread further inland 
along the rivers, and so agriculture moves even further inland up the river. 

That’s not necessarily a problem, except it means more and more pollutants are Q22 
discharged into the rivers . 

So these are brought downstream to the cities? 

Right. Hmm. Did you read that article about Miami, on the east coast of the USA? 

No. 

Well, apparently back in the 1950s they built channels to drain away the water in 
case of flooding. 

Sounds sensible. 

Yeah, they spent quite a lot of money on them. But what they didn't take into account 
was global warming . So they built the drainage channels too close to sea level, and Q23 


101 





















GTE- Golden' Tip j s ‘of English 


Audioscripts 


now sea levels are rising, they're more or less useless. If there's a lot of rain, the 
water can’t run away, there's nowhere for it to go. The whole design was faulty. 

carla; So what are the authorities doing about it now? 

rob: I don’t know, i did read that they’re aiming to stop disposing of waste water into 

the ocean over the next ten years. 

carla: But that won’t help with flood prevention now, will it? 

rob: No. Really they just need to find the money for something to replace the drainage Q24 

channels , in order to protect against flooding now. But in the long term they need 
to consider the whole ecosystem. 

carla: Right. Really, though, coastal cities can’t deal with their problems on their own, 

can they? I mean, they’ve got to start acting together at an international level 
instead of just doing their own thing. 

rob: Absolutely. The thing is, everyone knows what the problems are and 

environmentalists have a pretty good idea of what we should be doing about 
them, so they should be able to work together to some extent. But it's going to Q25 
be a long time before countries come to a decision on what principles they're 
prepared to abide by. 

carla: Yes, if they ever do. 


carla: So I think we've probably got enough for our presentation. It’s only fifteen minutes. 

rob: OK. So t suppose we’ll begin with some general historical background about why 

coastal cities were established. But we don't want to spend too Iona on that , the Q26 
other students will already know a bit about it. It’s all to do with communications 
and so on. 

carla: Yes. We should mention some geographical factors, things like wetlands and 

river estuaries and coastal erosion and so on. We could have some maps of 
different cities with these features marked. 

rob: On a handout you mean? Or some slides everyone can see ? Q27 

carla: Yeah, that’d be better. 

rob: It’d be good to go into past mistakes in a bit more detail. Did you read that case 

study of the problems there were in New Orleans with flooding a few years ago? 
carla: Yes. We could use that as the basis for that part of the talk . I don’t think the other Q28 

students will have read it, but they’ll remember hearing about the flooding at the time. 
rob: OK. So that’s probably enough background. 

carla: So then we’ll go on to talk about what action’s being taken to deal with the 

problems of coastal cities. 

rob: OK. What else do we need to talk about? Maybe something on future risks, 

looking more at the long term, if populations continue to grow, 
carla: Yeah. We’ll need to do a bit of work there, I haven’t got much information, have you? 

rob: No. We’ll need to look at some websites . Shouldn’t take too long. Q29 

carla: OK. And I think we should end by talking about international implications. Maybe 

we could ask people in the audience . We've got people from quite a lot of Q30 

different places. 

rob: That'd be interesting, if we have time, yes. So now shall we ... 

SECTION 4 

Producing enough energy to meet our needs has become a serious problem. Demand is rising 
rapidly, because of the world’s increasing population and expanding industry . Burning fossil Q31 
fuels, like gas, coal and oil, seriously damages the environment and they’ll eventually run out. 

For a number of years now, scientists have been working out how we can derive energy from 


102 



















GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Test 1 


renewable sources, such as the sun and wind, without causing pollution. Today I'll outline marine 
renewable energy - also called ocean energy - which harnesses the movement of the oceans. 

Marine renewable energy can be divided into three main categories: wave energy, tidal 
energy and ocean thermal energy conversion, and I'll say a few words about each one. 

First, wave energy. Numerous devices have been invented to harvest wave energy, with names 
such as Wave Dragon, the Penguin and Mighty Whale, and research is going on to try and 
come up with a really efficient method. This form of energy has plenty of potential, as the source 
is constant , and there's no danger of waves coming to a standstill. Electricity can be generated Q32 
using onshore systems, using a reservoir, or offshore systems. But the problem with ocean 
waves is that they’re erratic, with the wind-making them travel in every direction . This adds to Q33 
the difficulty of creating efficient technology: ideally all the waves would travel smoothly and 
regularly along the same straight line. Another drawback is that sand and other sediment on the 
ocean floor might be stopped from flowing normally, which can lead to environmental problems. Q34 


The second category of marine energy that I’ll mention is tidal energy. One major advantage 
of using the tide, rather than waves, as a source of energy is that it’s predictable : we know Q35 
the exact times of high and low tides for years to come. 

For tidal energy to be effective, the difference between high and low tides needs to be at least 
five metres, and this occurs naturally in only about forty places on Earth. But the right conditions 
can be created by constructing a tidal lagoon, an area of sea water separated from the sea. 

One current plan is to create a tidal lagoon on the coast of Wales. This will be an area of water 
within a bay at Swansea, sheltered by a U-shaped breakwater, or darn, built out from the Q36 
coast. The breakwater will contain sixteen hydro turbines, and as the tide rises, water rushes 
through the breakwater, activating the turbines, which turn a generator to produce electricity. 

Then, for three hours as the tide goes out, the water is held back within the breakwater, 
increasing the difference in water level, until it's several metres higher within the lagoon than in 
the open sea. Then, in order to release the stored water, gates in the breakwater are opened. Q37 
It pours powerfully out of the lagoon, driving the turbines in the breakwater in the opposite 
direction and again generating thousands of megawatts of electricity. As there are two high 
tides a day, this lagoon scheme would generate electricity four times a day, every day, for a 
total of around 14 hours in every 24 - and enough electricity for over 150,000 homes. 

This system has quite a lot in its favour: unlike solar and wind energy it doesn't depend 
on the weather; the turbines are operated without the need for fuel, so it doesn’t create Q38 

any greenhouse gas emissions; and very little maintenance is needed. It’s estimated 
that electricity generated in this way will be relatively cheap, and that manufacturing the 
components would create more than 2,000 jobs , a big boost to the local economy. w J 

On the other hand, there are fears that lagoons might harm both fish and birds, for example 
by disturbing migration patterns, and causing a build-up of silt, affecting local ecosystems. Q40 

There are other forms of tidal energy, but I'll go on to the third category of marine energy: 
ocean thermal energy conversion, This depends on there being a big difference in 
temperature between surface water and the water a couple of kilometres below the surface, 
and this occurs in tropical coastal areas. The idea is to bring cold water up to the surface 
using a submerged pipe. The concept dates back to 1881, when ... 


103 












GTE- Golden Tips 1 of English) 


Audioscripts 


TEST 2 


SECTION 1 

carl: Hi, come and take a seat. 

julie: Thank you. 

carl: My name’s Carl Rogers and I’m one of the doctors here at the Total Health Clinic. 

So I understand this is your first visit to the clinic? 
julie: Yes, it is. 

carl: OK, well I hope you’ll be very happy with the service you receive here. So if 

it's alright with you I'll take a few details to help me give you the best possible 
service. 

julie: Sure. 

carl: So can I check first of all that we have the correct personal details for you? So 

your full name is Julie Anne Garcia ? 
julie: That’s correct. 

carl: Perfect. And can I have a contact phone number? 

julie: It's 219 442 9785 . 

carl: OK, and then can I just check that we have the correct date of birth? 

julie: October tenth. 1992. 

carl: Oh, I actually have 1991, I'll just correct that now. Right, so that’s all good. Now I 

just need just a few more personal details ... do you have an occupation, either 
full-time or part-time? 

julie: Yes, I work full-time in Esterhazy’s - you know, the restaurant chain. I started off 

as a waitress there a few years ago and I'm a manager now. 
carl: Oh I know them, yeah, they're down on 114th Street, aren't they? 

julie: That's right. 

carl: Yeah, I’ve been there a few times. I just love their salads. 

julie; That’s good to hear. 

carl: Right, so one more thing I need to know before we talk about why you’re here, 

Julie, and that’s the name of your insurance company. 
julie: it's Cawlev Life Insurance, that’s C-A-W-L-E-Y. 

carl: Excellent, thank you so much. 


carl: 
,. julie: 
carl: 

julie: 

carl: 

julie: 

carl: 

julie: 

carl: 

julie: 

carl: 


Now Julie, let’s look at how we can help you. So tell me a little about what 
brought you here today. 

Well, I’ve been getting a pain in my knee , the left one. Not very serious at first, 
but it’s gotten worse, so I thought I ought to see someone about it. 

That's certainly the right decision. So how long have you been aware of this 
pain? Is it just a few days, or is it longer than that? 

Longer. It’s been worse for the last couple of days, but it’s three weeks since I 
first noticed it. It came on quite gradually though, so I kind of ignored it at first. 
And have you taken any medication yourself, or treated it in anyway? 

Yeah, I’ve been taking medication to deal with the pain, Tylenol, and that works 
OK for a few hours. But I don’t like to keep taking it. 

OK. And what about heat treatment? Have you tried applying heat at all? 

No, but I have been using ice on it for the last few days. 

And does that seem to help the pain at all? 

A little, yes. 

Good. Now you look as if you’re quite fit normally? 


Example 

Q1 

Q2 

Q3 

Q4 

Q5 

Q6 


104 














GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Test 2 


juue: I am, yes. 

carl: So do you do any sport on a regular basis? 

julie: Yes, I play a lot of tennis . I belong to a club so I go there a lot. I’m quite Q7 

competitive so I enjoy that side of it as well as the exercise. But I haven’t gone 
since this started. 

carl: Sure. And do you do any other types of exercise? 

julie: Yeah, I sometimes do a little swimming, but usually just wjien I'm on 

vacation. But normally I go running a few times a week, maybe three or Q8 

four times. 

carl: Hmm. So your legs are getting quite a pounding. But you haven’t had any 

problems up to now? 

julie: No, not with my legs. I did have an accident last year when I slipped and hurt my 

shoulder , but that's better.now. Q9 

carl: Excellent. And do you have any allergies? 

julie: No, none that I'm aware of. 

carl: And do you take any medication on a regular basis? 

julie: Well, I take vitamins but that’s all. I’m generally very healthy. Q10 

carl: OK, well let’s have a closer look and see what might be causing this problem. 

If you can just get up ... 

SECTION 2 

We’ll be arriving at Branley Castle in about five minutes, but before we get there I’ll give you 
a little information about the castle and what our visit will include. 

So in fact there’s been a castle on this site for over eleven hundred years. The first building 
was a fort constructed in 914 AD for defence against Danish invaders by King Alfred the 
Great’s daughter, who ruled England at the time. In the following century, after the Normans 
conquered England, the land was given to a nobleman called Richard de Vere, and he built 
a castle there that stayed in the de Vere family for over four hundred years. 

However, when Queen Elizabeth I announced that she was going to visit the castle in 1576 
it was beginning to look a bit run down, and it was decided that rather than repair the guest 
rooms, they’d make a new house for her out of wood next to the main hall. She stayed there Q11 
for four nights and apparently it was very luxurious, but unfortunately it was destroyed a few 
years later by fire. 

In the seventeenth century the castle belonged to the wealthy Fenys family, who enlarged 
it and made it more comfortable. However, by 1982 the Fenys family could no longer afford 
to maintain the castle, even though they received government support, and they put it on 
the market. It was eventually taken over by a company who owned a number of amusement Q12 
parks, but when we get there I think you’ll see that they've managed to retain the original 
atmosphere of the castle. 

When you go inside, you’ll find that in the state rooms there are life-like moving wax models Q13 
dressed in costumes of different periods in the past , which even carry on conversations 
together. As well as that, in every room there are booklets giving information about what the 
room was used for and the history of the objects and furniture it contains. 


105 















GTE- Golden Tips 1 of English) 1 


Audioscripts 


I The castle park’s quite extensive. At one time sheep were kept there, and in the nineteenth 

century the owners had a little zoo with animals like rabbits and even a baby elephant. 

Nowadays the old zoo buildings are used for public displays of paintings and sculpture The Q14 
park also has some beautiful trees, though the oldest of all, which dated back 800 years, was 
sadly blown down in 1987. 

Now, you’re free to wander around on your own until 4.30, but then at the end of our visit we’ll 
all meet together at the bottom of the Great Staircase. We’ll then go on to the long gallery, 
where there's a wonderful collection of photographs showing the family who Owned the castle 
a hundred years ago having tea and cakes in the conservatory — and we’ll then take you to 
the same place, where afternoon tea will be served tn ynu Q75 


Now if you can take a look at your plans you'll see Branley Castle has four towers, joined 
together by a high wall, with the river on two sides. 

Don’t miss seeing the Great Hall. That’s near the river in the main tower, the biggest one, 
which was extended and redesigned in the eighteenth century. 

If you want to get a good view of the whole castle, you can walk around the walls. The Q16 

starting point's quite near the main entrance - walk straight down the path until vou get to the 

south gate, and it’s lust there. Don’t go on to the north gate — there’s no way up from there. 

There’ll shortly be a show in which you can see archers displaying their skill with a bow and 
arrow. The quickest way to get there is to take the first left after the main entrance and follow Q17 
the path past the bridge, then you’ll see it in front of vou at the end . 

If you like animals there’s also a display of hunting birds - falcons and eagles and so on. If 

you go from the main entrance in the direction of the south gate, but turn right before vou net Q18 

there instead of going through it. you’ll see it on vour right past the first tower . 

At 3 pm there’s a short performance of traditional dancing on the outdoor stage. That’s right Q19 
at the other side of the castle from the entrance, and over the bridge . It’s about ten minutes’ 
walk or so. 

And finally the shop. It’s actually inside one of the towers, but the wav in is from the outside Q20 
Just take the first left after the main entrance, ao down the path and take the first right . It’s got 

some lovely gifts and souvenirs. 

Right, so we’re just arriving ... 


106 



















GTE- Golden Tips of English 


SECTION 3 

So, Rosie and Martin, let’s look at what you’ve got for your presentation on 
woolly mammoths. 

OK, we’ve got a short outline here. 

Thanks. So it’s about a research project in North America? 

Yes. But we thought we needed something general about woolly mammoths in 
our introduction, to establish that they were related to our modem elephant, and 
they lived thousands of years ago in the last ice age. 

Maybe we could show a video clip of a cartoon about mammoths. But that’d be a 
bit childish. Or we could have a diagram, it could be a timeline to show when they 
lived, with illustrations ? 

Or we could just show a drawing of them walking in the ice? No, let's go with 
your last suggestion. 

Good. Then you're describing the discovery of the mammoth tooth on St Paul’s 
Island in Alaska, and why it was significant. 

Yes. The tooth was found by a man called Russell Graham. He picked it up from 
under a rock in a cave. He knew it was special - for a start it was in really good 
condition, as if it had been just extracted from the animal’s jawbone. Anyway, 
they found it was 6,500 years old. 

So why was that significant? 

Well the mammoth bones previously found on the North American mainland were 

much less recent than that . So this was really amazing. 

Then we're making an animated diagram to show the geography of the area 
in prehistoric times. So originally, St Paul's Island wasn’t an island, it was 
connected to the mainland, and mammoths and other animals like bears were 
able to roam around the whole area. 
rosie: Then the climate warmed up and the sea level began to rise, and the island got 

cut off from the mainland. So those mammoths on the island couldn't escape; 
they had to stay on the island . 

martin: And in fact the species survived there for thousands of years after they'd become 

extinct on the mainland. 

tutor: So why do you think they died out on the mainland? 

rosie: No one’s sure. 

martin: Anyway, next we'll explain how Graham and his team identified the date when 

the mammoths became extinct on the island. They concluded that the extinction, 
happened 5.6QQ years ago, which is a very precise time for a prehistoric. 

extinction . It’s based on samples they took from mud at the bottom of a lake 
on the island. They analysed it to find out what had fallen in over time - bits of 
plants, volcanic ash and even DNAfrom the mammoths themselves. It's standard 
procedure, but it took nearly two years to do. 


tutor: 

rosie: 

tutor: 

martin: 

rosie: 

martin: 

tutor: 

rosie: 

tutor: 

rosie: 

martin: 


tutor: So why don’t you quickly go through the main sections of your presentation and 

discuss what action's needed for each part? ( . 

martin: OK. So for the introduction, we're using a visual, so once we’ve prepared that 

we’re done. 

rosie: I’m not sure, t think we need to write down all the ideas we want to include here , 

not just rely on memory. How we begin the presentation is so important... 
martin: You’re right. 

rosie: The discovery of the mammoth tooth is probably the most dramatic part, but 

we don’t have that much information, only what we got from the online article. I 
thought maybe we could get in touch with the researcher who led the team and 
ask him to tell us a bit more. 


Test 2 


Q21 


Q22 


Q23 


Q24 


Q25 


Q26 


107 


























GTE 1 -" Golden "Tips of English 


Audioscripts 


martin: Great idea. What about the section with the initial questions asked by the 

researchers? We've got a lot on that but we need to make it interesting. 
rosie: We could ask the audience to suggest some questions about it and then see how Q27 

many of them we can answer . I don’t think it would take too long. 
tutor: Yes that would add a bit of variety. 

martin: Then the section on further research carried out on the island - analysing the 

mud in the lake. I wonder if we’ve actually got too much information here, should 
we cut some? 

rosie: I don’t think so, but it’s all a bit muddled at present. 

martin: Yes, maybe it would be better if it followed a chronological pattern . Q28 

rosie: I think so. The findings and possible explanations section is just about ready, but 

we need to practise it so we’re sure it won’t overrun . Q29 

martin: I think It should be OK, but yes, let’s make sure. 

tutor: In the last section, relevance to the present day, you’ve got some good ideas but 

this is where you need to move away from the ideas of others and give vour own Q30 
viewpoint . 

martin: OK, we’ll think about that. Now shall we ... 


SECTION! 4 

In this series of lectures about the history of weather forecasting, I’ll start by examining its 
early history - that’ll be the subject of today’s talk. 

OK, so well start by going back thousands of years. Most ancient cultures had weather gods, 
and weather catastrophes, such as floods, played an important role in many creation myths. 
Generally, weather was attributed to the whims of the gods, as the wide range of weather 
gods in various cultures shows. For instance, there’s the Egyptian sun god Ra, and Thor, 
the Norse god of thunder and lightning. Many ancient civilisations developed rites such as 
dances in order to make the weather gods look kindly on them. Q 31 

But the weather was of daily importance: observing the skies and drawing the correct 
conclusions from these observations was really important, in fact their survival depended on Q32 
it. It isn’t known when people first started to observe the skies, but at around 650 BC, the 
Babylonians produced the first short-range weather forecasts, based on their observations 
of clouds and other phenomena. The Chinese also recognised weather patterns, and by Q33 
300 BC, astronomers had developed a calendar which divided the year into 24 festivals , each Q34 
associated with a different weather phenomenon. 

The ancient Greeks were the first to develop a more scientific approach to explaining the 
weather. The work of the phiiosopher and scientist Aristotle, in the fourth century BC, is 
especially noteworthy, as his ideas held sway for nearly 2,000 years. In 340 BC, he wrote a 
book in which he attempted to account for the formation of rain, clouds, wind and storms. He 
also described celestial phenomena such as haloes - that is, bright circles of light around 
the sun, the moon and bright stars — and comets . Many of his observations were surprisingly Q 35 
accurate. For example, he believed that heat could cause water to evaporate. But he also 
jumped to quite a few wrong conclusions, such as that winds are breathed out by the Earth. 

Errors like this were rectified from the Renaissance onwards. 


For nearly 2,000 years, Aristotle’s work was accepted as the chief authority on weather 
theory. Alongside this, though, in the Middle Ages weather observations were passed on in 


108 

















GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Test 2 

the form of proverbs, such as 'Red sky at night, shepherd's delight; red sky in the morning, Q36 
shepherd's warning’. Many of these are based on very good observations and are accurate, 
as contemporary meteorologists have discovered. 

For centuries, any attempt to forecast the weather could only be based on personal 
observations, but in the fifteenth century scientists began to see the need for instruments. Q37 
Until then, the only ones available were weather vanes - to determine the wind direction — 
and early versions of rain gauges. One of the first, invented in the fifteenth century, was a 
hygrometer, which measured humidity. This was one of many inventions that contributed to 
the development of weather forecasting. 

In 1592, the Italian scientist and inventor-Galileo developed the world’s first thermometer . His Q3S 
student Torricelli later invented the barometer, which allowed people to measure atmospheric 
pressure. In 1648, the French philosopher Pascal proved that pressure decreases with 
altitude. This discovery was verified by English astronomer Halley in 1686; and Halley was 
also the first person to map trade winds. 

This increasing ability to measure factors related to weather helped scientists to understand 
the atmosphere and its processes better, and they started collecting weather observation 
data systematically. In the eighteenth century, the scientist and politician Benjamin Franklin 
carried out work on electricity and lightning in particular, but he was also very interested in 
weather and studied it throughout most of his life. It was Franklin who discovered that storms Q39 
generally travel from west to east. 

In addition to new meteorological instruments, other developments contributed to our 
understanding of the atmosphere People in different locations began to keep records, and in 
the mid-nineteenth century, the invention of the telegraph made it possible for these records Q40 
to be collated. This led, by the end of the nineteenth century, to the first weather services. 

It was not until the early twentieth century that mathematics and physics became part of 
meteorology, and we’ll continue from that point next week. 


109 








GTE- Golden Tips of English 


n 


Audioscripts 



SECTION 1 


ANGELA: 

Hello, Flanders conference hotel. 


man: 

Oh, hi. 1 wanted-to ask about conference facilities at the hotei. Have 1 come 
through to the right person? 


ANGELA: 

You have. I'm the customer services manager. Mv name’s Anaela. So how can 1 
help you? 

Example 

man: 

Well, I'm calling from Barrett and Stansons, we’re a medical company based in 
Perth. 


ANGELA: 

Oh yes. 


man: 

And we’re organising a conference for our clients to be held in Sydney. It'll be 
held over two days and we’re expecting about fifty or sixty people. 


ANGELA: 

When were you thinking of having it? 


man: 

Some time early next year, like the end of January? It’d have to be a weekend. 


ANGELA: 

Let me see ... our conference facilities are already booked for the weekend 
beginning January 28th. We could do the first weekend in February? 


man: 

How about January 21st? 


ANGELA: 

I’m afraid that's booked too. 


man: 

Well, let's go for the February date then. 


ANGELA: 

So that’s the weekend beginning the 4th. 


man: 

OK. Now can you tell me a bit about what conference facilities you have? 


ANGELA: 

Sure. So for talks and presentations we have the Tesla room. 


man: 

Sorry? 


Angela: 

Tesla - that’s spelled T-E-S-LA It holds up to a hundred people, and it’s fully 
equipped with a projector and so on. 

Q1 

man: 

How about a microphone? 

Q2 

ANGELA: 

Yes, that’ll be all set up ready for you, and there’ll be one that members of the 
audience can use too, for questions, if necessary. 


man: 

Fine. And we’ll also need some sort of open area where people can sit and have 



a cup of coffee, and we’d like to have an exhibition of our products and services 
there as well, so that'll need to be quite a big space. 

Q3 

ANGELA: 

That's fine, there’s a central atrium with all those facilities, and you can come 
before the conference starts if you want to set everything up. 


man: 

Great. And 1 presume there’s wifi? 

Q4 

ANGELA: 

Oh yes, that’s free and available throughout the hotel. 


man: 

OK. 


ANGELA: 

Would you also like us to provide a buffet lunch? We can do a two-course meal 
with a number of different options. 


man: 

What sort of price are we looking at for that? 


ANGELA: 

Well, 1 can send you a copy of the standard menu. That’s $45 per person. Or you 
can have the special for $25 more. 

Q5 

man: 

1 think the standard should be OK, but yes, send me the menu. 



man: Now we’re also going to need accommodation on the Saturday night for some 

of the participants ... I'm not sure how many, but probably about 25. So what do 
you charge for a room? 

Angela: Well, for conference attendees we have a 25% reduction, so we can offer you 

rooms at $135. Normally a standard room's $ 180 . qq 


110 












GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Test 3 


maw: 

And does that include breakfast? 


awgela: 

Sure. And of course, guests can aiso make use of all the other facilities at the 
hotel. So we’ve got a spa where you can get massages and facials and so on, 
and there’s a pool up on the roof for the use of guests. 

Q7 

man: 

Great. Now what about transport links? The hotel’s downtown, isn’t it? 


ANGELA: 

Yes it’s about 12 kilometres from the airoort. but there’s a comclimentarv 
shuttle bus for guests. And it’s only about ten minutes’ walk from the central 
railway station. 

Q8 

man: 

OK. Now, 1 don’t know Sydney very well, can you just give me an idea of the 
location of the hotel? 


ANGELA: 

Well, it’s downtown on Wilby-Street, that’s quite a small street, and it’s not very 
far from the sea. And of course if the conference attendees want to go out on 

Q9 


the Saturday evening there’s a huge choice of places to eat. Then if they want 
tn make a night of it, they can qo on to one of the clubs in the area - there are a 

Q10 


great many to choose from. 


man: 

OK. So if we go ahead with this, can you give me some information about 
how much ... 



SECTION 2 

Good morning. My name’s Lucy Crittenden, and I'm the Director of Operations for an 
organisation that arranges volunteering in this part of the country. I'm hoping i can persuade 
one or two of you to become volunteers yourselves. Let me start by briefly explaining what 
we mean by volunteering. 

Volunteers are teenagers and adults who choose to spend some time, unpaid, helping other 
people in some way. Most volunteers devote two or three hours to this every week, while a 
few do much more. The people they help may have physical or behavioural difficulties, for 
example. 

Volunteers can do all sorts of things, depending on their own abilities and interests. If they're 
supporting a family that’s struggling, for example, they may be able to give them tips on 
cooking, or recommend how to plan their budget or how to shop sensibly on their income. 

They might even do some painting or wallpapering , perhaps alongside any members of the Q11 
family who are able to do it. Or even do some babysitting so that parents can go out for Q12 

a while. 

The benefit from volunteering isn’t only for the people being helped. Volunteers also gain 
from it: they're using their skills to cope with somebody’s mental or physical ill health, and 
volunteering mav be a valuable element of their CV when they’re applying for jobs : employers Q13 
usually look favourably on someone who’s given up time to help others, Significantly, most 
volunteers feel that what they’re doing gives them a purpose in their lives . And in my opinion, Q14 
they're lucky in that respect, as many people don’t have that feeling. 


Now I’d like to tell you what some of our volunteers have said about what they do, to give you 
an idea of the range of ways in which they can help people. 

Habib supports an elderly lady who’s beginning to show signs of dementia. Once a week 
they, along with other elderly people, go to the local community centre, where a group of 
people come in and sing. The songs take the listeners back to their youth , and for a little Q15 
while they can forget the difficulties that they face now. 


Ill 











GTE-"Golden Tips of' English 


Audioscripts 


Our volunteer Consuela is an amazing woman. She has difficulty walking herself, but she 
doesn't let that sto g jier . She helps a couple of people with similar difficulties, who had almost 
stopped walking altogether. By .using herself as an example. Consuela encourages them to Q16 
walk more and more . 

Minh visits a young man who lives alone and can’t leave his home on his own, so he hardly 
ever saw anyone. But together they go out to the cinema, or to see friends the young man Q17 

hadn’t been able to visit for -3 long time. 

Tanya visits an elderly woman once a week. When the woman found out that Tanya is a 
professional dressmaker, she got interested. Tanya showed her some soft toys she'd made, 
an d the, woman decided to try it herself . And now she really enjoys it, and spends hours Q18 
making toys. They’re not perhaps up to Tanya's standard yet, but she gains a lot of pleasure 
from doing it. 

Alexei is a volunteer with a family that faces a number of difficulties. By calmly talking over 
possible solutions with family members, he’s helping them to realise that they aren't helpless, 
and that they can do som ething themselves to improve their situation . This has been great for Q19 
their self-esteem. 

And the last volunteer I’ll mention, though there are plenty more, is Juba. She voiunteers 
with a teenage girl with learning difficulties, who wasn’t very good at talking to other people, 

Juba’s worked very patiently with her, and now the oiri is far better at expressing herself, and Q20 
at understanding other people . 

OK, I hope that's given you an idea of what volunteering is all about. Now I’d like ... 


SECTION 3 

lizzie: So how are you getting on with your teaching practice at the High School, Joe? 

joe: Well I've been put in charge of the school marching band, and it's quite a 

responsibility. I’d like to talk it over with you. 
lizzie: Go ahead. You'd better start by giving me a bit of background. 

joe: OK, Well the band has students in it from all years, so they're aged 11 to 18, 

and there are about 50 of them altogether. It’s quite a popular activity within the Q21 
school. I've never worked with a band of more than 20 before, and this is very 
different. 

lizzie: I can imagine. 

joe: They aren’t really good enough to enter national band competitions, but they're in 

a regional one later in the term. Even if they don’t win, and I don't expect them to, Q22 
hopefully it’ll be an incentive for them to try and improve. 
lizzie: Yes, hopefully. 

joe: Well, now the town council’s organising a carnival in the summer, and the band Q23 

has been asked to perform. If you ask me, they aren't really up to it yet, and I 
need to get them functioning better as a band, and in a very short time. 
lizzie: Have you been doing anything with them? Apart from practising the music, 

I mean. 

Joe: I played a recording I came across, of a drummer talking about how playing in a Q24 

band had changed his life. I think it was an after-dinner speech. I thought it was 
pretty inspiring, because being in the band had stopped him from getting involved 
in crime. The students seemed to find it interesting, too. 


112 



















GTE- Golden Tips of English 


lizzie: That's good, 

joe: I’m planning to show them that old film from the 1940s 'Strike Up the Band', and 

talk about it with the students. What do you think? 
lizzie: Good idea. As it's about a school band, it might make the students realise how 

much they can achieve if they work together. 

joe: That's what I’ve got in mind. I’m hoping I can take some of the band to a parade 

that’s going to take place next month. A couple of marching bands will be 
performing, and the atmosphere should be quite exciting. It depends on whether I 
can persuade the school to hire a coach or two to take us there. 
lizzie: Mmm. They sound like good ideas to me. 

joe: Thanks, 

joe: Can I tell you about a few 1 people in the band who I'm finding it quite difficult to 

cope with? I’m sure you’ll have some ideas about what I can do, 
lizzie: Go ahead. 

joe: There’s a flautist who says she loves playing in the band. We rehearse twice a 

week after school, but she's hardly ever there . Then she looks for me the next 
day and gives me a very plausible reason - she says she had to help her mother, 
or she’s been ill, but to be honest, I don't believe her. 
lizzie: Oh dear! Any more students with difficulties? 

joe: Plenty! There’s a trumpeter who thinks she’s the best musician in the band, 

though she certainly isn’t. She's always saving what she thinks other people 
should do . which makes my job pretty difficult. 
lizzie: She sounds a bit of a nightmare! 

joe: You can say that again. One of the trombonists has got an impressive sense 

of rhythm, and could be an excellent musician - except that he has breathing 
difficulties and he doesn’t really have enough breath for the trombone . He’d be 
much better off playing percussion, for instance, but he refuses to give up. So he 
ends up only playing half the notes. 
lizzie: I suppose you have to admire his determination. 

joe: Maybe. One of the percussionists isn’t too bad, but he never seems to interact 

with other people, and he always rushes off as soon as the rehearsal ends . I 

don't know if there are family reasons, or what. But it isn’t good in a band, where 
people really need to feel they’re part of a group. 
lizzie: Hmm. 

joe: There are others too, but at least that gives you an idea of what I’m up against. 

Do you have any thoughts about what I can do, Lizzie? 


SECTION 4 

As you all know, the university is planning an arts festival for later this year, and here in the 
music department we’ve planned three concerts. These will be public performances, and 
the programme has just been finalised. The theme of the festival is links between the UK 
and Australia, and this is reflected in the music: each concert will feature both British and 
Australian composers. I’ll tell you briefly about the Australian music, as you probably won’t be 
familiar with that. 


Test 3 


Q25 


Q26 


Q27 


Q28 


Q29 


Q30 


113 

















GTE- 1 ' Golden 'Tips of English 


! 


Audioscripts 


The first concert will include music by Liza Lim, who was bom in Perth, Western Australia, in 
1966. As a child, Lim originally learned to play the piano - like so many children — and also 
the violin, but when she was 11 her teachers encouraged her to start composing, She found Q31 
this was her real strength, and she studied and later taught composition, both in Australia and 
in other countries. As a composer, she has received commissions from numerous orchestras, 
other performers and festivals in several countries. 

Liza Lim's compositions are. vibrant and full of energy , and she often explores Asian and Q32 
Australian Aboriginal cultural sources, including the native instrument, the didgeridoo: this 
is featured in a work called The Compass. Her music is very expressive, so although it is 
complex, it has the power of connecting with audiences and performers alike. Q33 

In the festival we’re going to give a semi-staged performance of The Oresteia. This is an 
opera in seven parts, based on the trilogy of ancient Greek tragedies by Aeschylus. Lim Q34 
composed this when she was in her mid-20s, and she also wrote the text, along with Barrie 
Kosky. It’s performed by six singers, a dancer, and an orchestra that, as well as standard 
orchestra! instruments, includes electric guitar, and a traditional Turkish stringed instrument. 

Lim wrote that because the stories in the tragedies are not easy to tell, the sounds she 
creates are also disturbing , and they include breathing, sobbing, laughing and whistling. The Q35 
work lasts around 75 minutes, and the rest of the concert will consist of orchestral works by 
the British composers Ralph Vaughan Williams and Frederick Delius. 


Moving on now to our second concert, this will begin with instrumental music by British 
composers - Benjamin Britten and Judith Weir. After the interval well go to Australia for a 
piece by Ross Edwards: The Tower of Remoteness. According to Edwards, the inspiration 
for this piece came from nature, when he was sitting alone in the dry bed of a creek, 
overshadowed by the leaves of palm trees, listening to the birds and insects. The Tower of 
Remoteness is scored for piano and clarinet . Edwards says he realised years after writing the Q36 
piece that he had subconsciously modelled its opening phrase on a bird call. 

Ross Edwards was born in 1943 in Sydney, Australia, and studied at the Sydney 
Conservatorium of Music and the universities of Adelaide and Sydney. He’s well known in 
Australia, and in fact he’s one of the country’s most performed composers. He’s written a 
wide range of music, from symphonies and concertos to some composed specifically for 
children. Edwards's music has been described as being ‘deeply connected to Australia’, and 
it can be regarded as a celebration of the diversity of cultures that Australia can be proud of. Q37 

The last of the three Australian composers to be represented in bur festival is Carl Vine. Born 
in 1954, Vine, like Liza Lim, comes from Perth, Western Australia. He took up the cornet at 
the age of five, switching to the piano five years later. However, he went to university to study 
Physics, before changing to composition. After graduating he moved to Sydney and worked Q38 
as a freelance pianist and composer. Before long he had become prominent in Australia as a 
composer for dance , and in fact has written 25 scores of that type. Q39 

In our third concert, Vine will be represented by his music for the flag hand-over ceremony 
of the Olympics held in 1996. This seven-minute orchestral piece was of course heard by Q40 
millions of people worldwide, and we'll hear it alongside works written by British composers 
Edward Elgar and, more recently, Thomas Ades. 


114 
















GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Test 4 

SECTION 1 

ANDREW: Good morning, Clare House Hotel. Andrew speaking. I’m the Events Manager. Example 


SAM! 

Good morning, Andrew. My name’s Samantha. I’m arranging a party for my 
parents’ fiftieth wedding anniversary, and I'm ringing to ask about hiring a room 
some time next September. Also my parents and several of the guests will need 
accommodation. 

ANDREW! 

OK, I’m sure we can help you with that. Will you be having a sit-down meal or a 

buffet? ,, * 

SAM! 

ANDREW! 

SAM! 

ANDREW! 

Probably a sit-down. 

And do you know how many people there’ll be? 

Around eighty, 1 think. 

Well we have two rooms that can hold that number. One is the Adelphi Room. 

That can seat eiahtv-five. or hold over a hundred if people are standing for a Q1 

buffet. 

SAM! 

ANDREW! 

Right. 

If you have live music, there’s room for four or five musicians in the gallery 
overlooking the room. Our guests usually appreciate the fact that the music can 
be loud enough for dancing, but not too loud for conversation. 

SAM! 

ANDREW! 

Yes, 1 really don’t like it when you can't talk. 

Exactly. Now the Adelphi Room is at the back of the' hotel, and there are French 
windows leading out onto the terrace. This has a beautiful display of pots of 
roses at that time of the year. Q2 

SAM! 

ANDREW! 

Which direction does it face? 

Southwest, so that side of the hotel gets the sun in the afternoon and early 

SAM! 

ANDREW! 

evening. 

Very nice. 

From the terrace you can see the area of trees within the grounds of the hotel, or Q3 
you can stroll through there to the river - that’s on the far side, so it isn’t visible 
from the hotel. 

SAM! 

ANDREW! 

OK. 

Then another option is the Carlton Room. This is a bit bigger - it can hold up to a 
hundred and ten people - and it has the advantaae of a stage, which is useful if Q4 
you have any entertainment, or indeed a small band can fit onto it. 

SAM! 

ANDREW! 

And can you go outside from the room? 

No, the Carlton Room is on the first floor, but on one side the windows look out 
onto the lake. 

SAM! 

ANDREW! 

SAM! 

ANDREW! 

Lovely. 1 think either of those rooms would be suitable. 

Can 1 tell you about some of the options we offer in addition? 

Please do. 

As well as a meal, you can have an MC, a Master of Ceremonies; who’ll be with 

SAM! 

you throughout the party. 

What mrantly is the MC’s function? 1 suppose thev make a speech during the Q5 

ANDREW! 

meal if we need one, do they? 

That's right. All our MCs are trained as public speakers, so they can easily get 
people’s attention - many guests are glad to have someone who can make 
themselves heard above the chatterl And thev’re also vour support - if anything Q6 
goes wrong, the MC will deal with it, so you can relax. 


115 














GTE 4 -' Golden Tips bf English 


Audioscripts 


sam: Great! I’ll need to ask you about food, but something else that’s important is 

accommodation. You obviously have rooms in the hotel, but do you also have 
any other accommodation, like cabins , for example? Q7 

Andrew: Yes, there are five in the grounds, all self-contained. They each sleep two to four 

people and have their own living room, bathroom and small kitchen. 
sam: That sounds perfect for what we’ll need. 


Now you have various facilities, don’t you? Are they all included in the price of 
hiring the room? The pool, for instance. 

Normally you’d be able to use it, but it’ll be closed throughout September for Q8 

refurbishment. I’m afraid. The gym will be available, though, at no extra charge . Q9 
That’s open all day, from six in the morning until midnight. 

Right. 

And the tennis courts, but there is a small additional payment for those . We have Q10 
four courts, and it’s worth booking in advance if you possibly can, as there can be 
quite a long waiting list for them! 

Right. Now could we discuss the food? This would be dinner, around seven 
o'clock ... 


SECTION 2 

Hello everyone. I’m Jake Stevens and I’m your rep here at the hotel. I’m sure you'll ail have 
a great time here. So let me tell you a bit about what’s on offer. I'll start by telling you about 
some of the excursions that are available for guests. 

One thing you have to do while you’re here is go dolphin watching. On our boat trips, we 
pretty well guarantee you’ll see dolphins - if you don’t you can repeat the trip free of charge. 

We organise daily trips for just 35 euros. Unfortunately there aren’t anv places left for this Q11 
afternoon's trip , but come and see me to book for later in the week. 

If you’re energetic, I’d recommend our forest walk. It's a guided walk of about seven 
kilometres. There’ll be a stop half way, and you'll be provided with a drink and sandwiches . Q12 
There’s some fairly steep climbs up the hills, so you need to be reasonably fit for this one, 
with good shoes, and bring a waterproof in case it rains. It’s just 25 euros all inclusive, and it’s 
every Wednesday, 

Then on Thursdays we organise a cycle trip, which will give you all the fun of biking without 
the effort. We’ll take you and your bike up to the top of Mount Lama, and leave you to bike 
back - it’s a 700-metre drop in just 20 kilometres so this isn’t really for inexperienced cyclists Q13 
as you'll be going pretty fast. And if it’s a clear day, you’ll have fantastic views. 

On our local craft tour you can find out about the traditional activities in the island. And 
the best thing about this trip is that it’s completely free . You’ll be taken to a factory where Q14 
jewellery is made, and also a ceramics centre. If you want, you can buy some of the products 
but that’s entirely up to you. The trip starts after lunch on Thursday, and you'll return by 6 pm. 

If you’re interested in astronomy you may already know that the island’s one of the best 
places in the world to observe the night sky. We can offer trips to the observatory on Friday 
for those who are interested. They cost 90 euros per person and you'll be shown the huge 
telescopes and have a talk from an expert, who’ll explain all about how they work. Afterwards Q15 
we’ll head down to Sunset Beach, where you can have a dip in the ocean if you want before 
we head off back to the hotel. / 


sam: 

Andrew: 


sam: 

Andrew: 


sam: 


116 






















GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Test 4 


Finally, there’s horse riding. This is organised by the Equestrian Centre over near Playa 
Cortino and it's a great experience if you're a keen horseback rider, or even if you’ve never Q16 

been on a horse before . They take you down to the beach, and you can canter along the 
sand and through the waves. It costs 35 euros and it’s available every day. 


So there’s plenty to do in the daytime, but what about night life? 

Well, the number one attraction's called ‘Musical Favourites’. Guests'enjoy a three-course 
meal and unlimited free drinks, and watch a fantastic show, starting with musicals set in 
Paris and then crossing the Atlantic to Las Vegas and finally Copacabana. At the end the 
cast members come down from the stage , still in their stunning costumes, and you'll have Q17 
a chance to chat with them . It's hugely popular, so let me know now if you're interested 
because it’s no good leaving it until the last minute . It's on Friday night. Tickets are just Q18 

50 euros each, but for an extra 10 euros you can have a table right by the stage. 

If you'd like to go back in time, there's the Castle Feast on Saturday evening. It’s held in a 
twelfth-century castle, and you eat in the great courtyard, with ladies in long gowns serving 
your food. You’re given a whole chjcken each, which you eat in the medieval way, using 
your hands instead of cutlery , and you’re entertained by competitions where the horseback 
riders attempt to knock one another off their horses. Then you can watch the dancers in the 
ballroom and join in as well if vou want . OK, so now if anyone ... 


Q19 

Q20 


SECTION 3 


STEPHANIE! 

TREVOR! 

STEPHANIE! 

TREVOR! 

STEPHANIE! 

TREVOR! 


STEPHANIE! 

TREVOR! 


STEPHANIE! 

TREVOR! 


Hello, Trevor. 

Hello, Stephanie. You said you wanted to talk about the course I’m taking on 
literature for children. 

That’s right. I'm thinking of doing it next year, but I’d like to find out more about 
it first. 

OK, well, as you probably know, it’s a one-year course. It's divided into six 
modules, and you have to take all of them. One of the most interesting ones, for 
me, at least, was about the purpose of children's literature. 

You mean, whether it should just entertain children or should be educational, 
as well. 

Right, and whether the teaching should be factual - giving them information 
about the world - or ethical, teaching them values. What's fascinating is that 
the writer isn’t necessarily conscious of the message they’re conveying . For 
instance, a story might show a child who has a problem as a result of not doing 
what an adult has told them to do, implying that children should always 
obey adults. 

I see what you mean. 

That module made me realise how important stories are - they can have a 
significant effect on children as they grow up. Actually, it inspired me to have a_ 
go at it myself , just for my own-interest. I know I can’t compete with the really 
popular stories, like the Harry Potter books - they’re very good, and even young 
kids like my seven-year-old niece love reading them. 

Mm. I'm very interested in illustrations in stories. Is that covered in the course? 
Yes, there's a module on pictures, and how they’re sometimes centra! to 
the story. 


Q21 


Q22 


117 

















GTE 4 'Golden Tips of‘English 




Audioscripts 


/ 


i 


Stephanie: 

trevor: 

Stephanie: 

trevor: 

Stephanie: 

trevor: 


Stephanie: 

trevor: 


That’s good. I remember some frightening ones I saw as a child and I can still see 
them vividly in my mind, years later! Pictures can be so powerful, just as powerful 
as words. I’ve always enjoyed drawing, so that's the field I want to ao into when I Q23 
finish the course . I bet that module will be really helpful. 

I’m sure it will. We also studied comics in that module, but I'm not convinced of 
their value, not compared with books. One of the great things about words is that 
you use your imagination, but with a comic you don’t have to. 

But children are so used to visual input - on TV, video games, and so on. There 
are plenty of kids who wouldn't even try to read a book, so I think comics can Q24 
serve a really useful purpose . 

You mean, it’s better to read a comic than not to read at all? Yes. I suppose you’re 
right . I just think it’s sad when children don’t read books. 

What about books for girls and books for boys? Does the course go into that? 

Yes, there's a module on it. For years, lots of stories, in English, at least, 

assumed that boys went out and did adventurous things and girls stayed at 

home and played with dolls. I was amazed how many books were targeted at lust Q25 

one sex or the other , Of course this reflects society as it is when the books are 

written. 

That's true. So it sounds as though you think it's a good course. 

Definitely. 


trevor: 

Stephanie: 

trevor: 

STEPHANIE: 

trevor: 

Stephanie: 


trevor: 

Stephanie: 

trevor: 

Stephanie: 

trevor: 

Stephanie: 


trevor: 

Stephanie: 

trevor: 

Stephanie: 

trevor: 

Stephanie: 


Have you been reading lots of children’s stories, to help you decide whether to 
take the course? 

Yeah. I've gone as far back as the late seventeenth century, though I know there 
were earlier children's stories. 

So does that mean you've read Perrault's fairy tales? Cinderella, The Sleeping 
Beauty, and so on. , 

Yes. They must be important, because no stories of that type had been written 
before, these were the first . Then there’s The Swiss Family Robinson. 

I haven’t read that. 

The English name makes it sound as though Robinson is the family’s surname, 
but a more accurate translation would be The Swiss Robinsons, because it’s 
about a Swiss family who are shipwrecked, like Robinson Crusoe in the novel of 

a century earlier . 

Well I never knew that! 

Have you read Hoffmann’s The Nutcracker and the Mouse King ? 

Wasn’t that the basis for Tchaikovsky’s ballet The Nutcracker ? 

That's right. It has some quite bizarre elements. 

I hope you've read Oscar Wilde’s The Happy Prince. It’s probably my favourite 
children’s story of all time. 

Mine too! And it’s so surprising, because Wilde is best known for his plays, and 
most of them are very witty, but The Happy Prince is really moving. I struggled 
with Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rinas ~ three Iona books, and I gave up after one . 

It’s extremely popular, though. 

Yeah, [as audio] but whereas something like The Happy Prince just carried me 
along with it, The Lord of the Rings took more effort than ! was prepared to give it. 
I didn’t find that - I love it. 

Another one I’ve read is War Horse. 

Oh yes. It’s about the First World War, isn’t it? Hardly what vou’d expect for a 
children’s storv . 

Exactly, but it’s been very successful. Have you read any ... 


Q26 


Q27 


Q28 


Q29 


Q30 


118 
























GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Test 4 


SECTION-4 

In today’s class I’m going to talk about marine archaeology, the branch of archaeology 
focusing on human interaction with the sea, lakes and rivers. It’s the study of ships, cargoes, 
shipping facilities, and other physical remains. I’ll give you an example, then go on to show 
how this type of research is being transformed by the use of the latest technology. 

Atlit-Yam was a village on the coast of the eastern Mediterranean, which seems to have 
been thriving until around 7,000 BC. The residents kept cattfe, caught fish and stored grain. 

They had wells for fresh water, many of their houses were built around a courtyard and were 
constructed of stone. The village contained an impressive monument: seven half-tonne stones 
standing in a semicircle around a spring , that might have been used for ceremonial purposes. Q31 

Atlit-Yam may have been destroyed swiftly by a tsunami, or climate change may have caused 
glaciers to melt and sea levels to rise, flooding the village gradually. Whatever the cause, it 
now lies ten metres below the surface of the Mediterranean, buried under sand at the bottom 
of the sea. It's been described as the largest and best preserved prehistoric settlement ever 
found on the seabed. 

For marine archaeologists, Atlit-Yam is a treasure trove. Research on the buildings, tools and Q32 
the human remains has revealed how the bustling village once functioned, and even what 
diseases some of its residents suffered from. But of course this is only one small village, one 
window into a lost world. For a fuller picture, researchers need more sunken settlements, but 
the hard part is finding them. 

Underwater research used to require divers to find shipwrecks or artefacts, but in the second 
half of the twentieth century, various types of underwater vehicles were developed, some 
controlled from a ship on the surface, and some of them autonomous, which means they 
don’t need to be operated by a person. 

Autonomous underwater vehicles, or AUVs, are used in the oil industry, for instance, to create 
maps of the seabed,before rigs and pipelines are installed. To navigate they use sensors, Q33 
such as compasses and sonar. Until relatively recently they were very expensive, and so 
heavy that they had to be launched from a large vessel with a winch. Q34 


But the latest AUVs are much easier to manoeuvre - they can be launched from the shore or a 
small ship. And they're much cheaper, which makes them more accessible to research teams. 

They're also very sophisticated. They can communicate with each other and, for example, work 
out the most efficient way to survey a site, or to find particular objects on the seabed. 

Field tests show the approach can work. For example, in a trial in 2015, three AUVs searched 
for wrecks at Marzamemi, off the coast of Sicily. The site is the final resting place of an 
ancient Roman ship, which sank in the sixth century AD while ferrying prefabricated marble Q35 
elements for the construction of an early church. The AUVs mapped the area in detail, finding 
other ships carrying columns of the same material. 

Creating an internet in the sea for AUVs to communicate is no easy matter. Wifi networks on land 
use electromagnetic waves, but in water these will only travel a few centimetres. Instead, a more 
complex mix of technologies is required. For short distances, AUVs can share data using light, Q36 
while acoustic waves are used to communicate over long distances. But more creative solutions 
are also being developed, where an AUV working on the seabed offloads data to a second AUV, 
which then surfaces and beams the data home to the research team using a satellite. 

There’s also a system that enables AUVs to share information from seabed scans, and 
other data. So if an AUV surveying the seabed finds an intriguing object, it can share the 


119 













GTEGolden- -Tips fof' En-glish|.I 




i — 


Audioscripts 


I coordinates of the object - that is, its position - with a nearby AUV that carries superior 

cameras , and arrange for that AUV to make a closer inspection of the object. Q37 

Marine archaeologists are excited about the huge potential of these AUVs for their discipline. 

One site where they're going to be deployed is the Gulf of Baratti, off the Italian coast. In 
1974, a 2,000-year-old Roman vessel was discovered here, in 18 metres of water. When It 
sank, it was carrying medical goods, in wooden or tin receptacles. Its cargo gives us insight Q38 
into the treatments available all those years ago, including tablets that are thought to have 
been dissolved to form a cleansing liquid for the eves . Q39 

Other Roman ships went down nearby, taking their cargoes with them. Some held huge pots 
made of terracotta. Some were used for transporting cargoes of olive oil, and others held 
wine . In many cases it’s only these containers that remain, while the wooden ships have been Q40 
buried under silt on the seabed. 

Another project that's about to ... 



120 












GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening and Reading answer keys 



LISTENING 


Section 1, Questions 1-10 ' Section 3, Questions 21-30 


1 

Canadian 

21 

B 

j| 

2 

furniture 

22 

A 

i j 

3 

Park 

23 

C 

|] 

4 

250 (sterling) 

24 

B 


5 

phone 

25 

A 

II 

6 

10(th) September 

26 

B 

- !-:i 

7 

museum 

27 

A 

h 

8 

time 

28 

F 

i 

9 

blond(e) 

29 

G 

II 

10 

87954 82361 

30 

C 

M 


Section 2, Questions 11-20 Section 4, Questions 31-40 


11&12 

IN EITHER ORDER 

31 

industry 

A 


32 

constant 

C 


33 

direction- 

13&14 

IN EITHER ORDER 

34 

floor 

B 


35 

predictable 

E 


36 

bay 

15 B 


37 

gates 

16 B 


38 

fuel 

17 C 


39 

jobs 

18 A 


40 

migration 


19 A 

20 C 


If you score ... 


0-18 

19-27 

28-40 

you are unlikely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions and we 
recommend that you spend a lot 
of time improving your English 
before you take IELTS. 

you may get an acceptable 
score under examination 
conditions but we recommend 
that you think about having 
more practice or lessons before 
you take IELTS. 

you are likely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions but 
remember that different 
institutions will find different 
scores acceptable. 


121 











GTET Golden Tips d'f--English 


F:' v 






Listening and Reading answer keys 


TEST 1 


READING 


Reading Section 1, 

21 

26 weeks 

Questions 1-14 

22 

six weeks 


23 

£112.75 

1 TRUE 

24 

39 weeks 

2 FALSE 

25 

antenatal clinics 

3 FALSE 

26 

personal circumstances 

4 NOT GIVEN 

27 

grants 

5 TRUE 

6 FALSE ^ 



j c Reading Section 3, 

S e Questions 28-40 


9 A 

28 

ii 

10 B 

29 

viii 

11 E 

30 

vii 

12 D 

31 

iii 

13 D 

32 

vi 

14 B 

33 

A 


34 

B 

Reading Section 2, 

35 

D 

Questions 15-27 

36 

C 

15 Hospitality Department 

37 

B 

\ 38 

insects 

16 academic calendar 

39 

tomb 

17 1 (st) October 

18 nominated contractor 

19 permits 

20 Concorde Building 

40 

eruption 


If you score ... 


0-23 

24-31 

32-40 

you are unlikely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions and 
we recommend that you spend 
a lot of time improving your 
English before you take IELTS. 

you may get an acceptable 
score under examination 
conditions but we recommend 
that you think about having 
more practice or lessons 
before you take IELTS. 

you are likely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions but 
remember that different 
institutions will find different 
scores acceptable. 




. 1 ; 


122 






















GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening and Reading answer keys 


TEST 2 




LISTENING 





Section 1, Questions 1-10 

Section 3, Questions 21-30 



1 

219 442 9785 

21 

B 



2 

10(th) October 

22 

C 



3 

manager 

23 

A 



4 

Cawley 

24 

A 



5 

knee 

25 

E 



6 

3 weeks 

26 

D 



7 

tennis 

27 

A 


[■; 

8 

running 

28 

H 


| 

9 

shoulder 

29 

G 



10 

vitamins 

30 

C 



Section 2, Questions 11-20 

Section 4, Questions 31-40 


i-: 

11 

B 

31 

dances 


i? 

12 

C 

32 

survival 


l> 

13 

C 

33 

clouds 



14 

B 

34 

festivals 


j 

15 

A 

35 

comets 


II 

16 

H ■ 

36 

sky 



17 

D 

37 

instruments 



18 

F 

38 

thermometer 


: 

19 

A 

39 

storms 



20 

E 

40 

telegraph 




If you score... 


0-17 

18-26 

27-40 

you are unlikely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions and we 
recommend that you spend a lot 
of time improving your English 
before you take IELTS. 

you may get an acceptable 
score under examination 
conditions but we recommend 
that you think about having 
more practice or lessons before 
you take IELTS. 

you are likely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions but 
remember that different 
institutions will find different 
scores acceptable. 



123 













GTE!■' Golden Tips-Of - English 


•i i : 


vi! !: 


Listening and Reading answer keys 


TEST 2 


READING 


Reading Section 1, ,, 
Questions 1-14 

1 c 

2 A 

3 B 

4 E 

5 D 

6 A 

7 B 

8 FALSE 

9 FALSE 

10 NOT GIVEN 

11 NOT GIVEN 

12 TRUE 

13 TRUE 

14 TRUE 

Reading Section 2, 
Questions 15-27 

15 clarification 

16 discount 

17 disciplinary 

18 pain 

19 storage 

Sf you score ... 


20 

machinery 

21 

list 

22 

tool 

23 

energy 

24 

electronics 

25 

needs 

26 

permission 

27 

limitations 


Reading Section 3 } 
Questions 28-40 


28 

E 

29 

C 

30 

B 

31 

A 

32 

D 

33 

B 

34 

G 

35 

A 

36 

permit 

37 

earthquake 

38 

storm 

39 

roadway 

40 

pedestrians 


0-27 

28-33 

34-40 

you are unlikely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions and 
we recommend that you spend 
a lot of time improving your 
English before you take IELTS. 

you may get an acceptable 
score under examination 
conditions but we recommend < 
that you think about having 
more practice or lessons 
before you take IELTS. 

you are likely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions but 
remember that different 
institutions will find different 
scores acceptable. 



124 













GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Listening and Reading answer keys 



LISTENING 

Section 1, Questions 1-10 

1 Tesla 

2 microphone 

3 exhibition 

4 wifi 

5 45 

6 135 

7 pool 

8 airport 

9 sea 

10 clubs 

Section 2, Questions 11-20 

11 §,12 IN EITHER ORDER 

A 

E 

13&14 IN EITHER ORDER 
B 
E 

15 F 

16 A 

17 E 

18 G 

19 D 

20 C 


Section 3, Questions 21-30 


21 

50 

22 

regional 

23 

carnival 

24 

drummer 

25 

film 

26 

parade 

27 

D 

28 

B 

29 

E 

30 

F 


Section 4, Questions 31-40 


31 

violin 

32 

energy 

33 

complex 

34 

opera 

35 

disturbing 

36 

clarinet 

37 

diversity 

38 

physics 

39 

dance 

40 

Olympics 


If you score... 


0-17 

18-27 

28-40 

you are unlikely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions and we 
recommend that you spend a lot 
of time improving your English 
before you take IELTS. 

you may get an acceptable 
score under examination 
conditions but we recommend 
that you think about having 
more practice or lessons before 
you take IELTS. 

you are likely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions but 
remember that different 
institutions will find different 
scores acceptable. 









GTE- 1 "'Golden Tips o f English) ■■ ! -■■■■ 


Listening and Reading answer keys 


TEST 3 


READING 


Reading Section 1, 
Questions 1-14 

1 B 

2 E 

3 D 

4 C 

5 C 

6 B 

7 A 

8 FALSE 

9 TRUE 

10 FALSE 

11 FALSE 

12 TRUE 

13 NOT GIVEN 

14 FALSE 

Reading Section 2, 
Questions 15-27 

15 emails 

16 impact assessment 

17 equipment 

18 quality 

19 crime 


20 

(computer) viruses 

21 

(confidential) helplines 

22 

questionnaire 

23 

account 

24 

10 days 

25 

complete 

26 

employer 

27 

refund 

Reading Section 3 } 
Questions 28-40 

28 

B 

29 

A 

30 

C 

31 

D 

32 

A 

33 

B 

34 

D 

35 

A 

36 

B 

37 

tsetse fly 

38 

immune system 

39 

proteins 

40 

cattle 


If you score ... 


0-23 

24-32 

33-40 

you are unlikely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions and 
we recommend that you spend 
a lot of time improving your 
English before you take IELTS. 

you may get an acceptable 
score under examination 
conditions but we recommend ! 
that you think about having 
more practice or lessons 
before you take IELTS. 

you are likely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions but 
remember that different 
institutions will find different 
scores acceptable. 


126 













GTE- Golden Tips of English 



Listening and Reading answer keys 


TEST 4 


LISTENING 




j! 

Section 1, Questions 1-10 

Section 3„ Questions 21-30 



1 85 

21 

A 


: 

2 roses 

22 

C 


II 

3 trees 

23 

A 



4 stage 

24 

B 



S speech , 

25 

B 

> 

| 

6 support 

26 

F 


! 

7 cabins 

27 

E 


j 

8 C 

28 

C 


if 

9 A 

29 

B 



10 B 

30 

G 


i: 

Section 2, Questions 11-20 

Section 4, Questions 31-40 


If 

Is 

11 G 

31 

spring 



12 D 

32 

tools 


'{■: 

13 A 

33 

maps 



14 E 

34 

heavy 


1 

15 F 

35 

marble 



16 B • 

36 

light 


ly 

17&18 IN EITHER ORDER 

37 

camera(s) 



B 

38 

medical 


] 

D 

39 

eyes 


j 

19&20 IN EITHER ORDER 

40 

wine 


! 


If you score... 


0-18 

19-27 

28-40 

you are unlikely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions and we 
recommend that you spend a lot 
of time improving your English 
before you take IELTS. 

you may get an acceptable 
score under examination 
conditions but we recommend 
that you think about having 
more practice or lessons before 
you take IELTS. 

you are likely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions but 
remember that different 
institutions will find different 
scores acceptable. 


<5 


127 


j':! 

G: i 










GTEGolden Tips cbf English ! 1 i- .- ' r '• •> - ' 


Listening and Reading answer keys 


TEST 4 


READING 


Reading Section 1, 
Questions 1-14 

1 D 

2 B 

3 C 

4 F 

5 D 

6 G 

7 E 

8 B 

9 TRUE 

10 FALSE 

11 FALSE 

12 NOT GIVEN 

13 TRUE 

14 TRUE 

Reading Section 2, 
Questions 15-27 

15 stadium 
IS team 

17 hygiene 

18 storage 

19 guaranteed 


20 

status 

21 

debts 

22 

profits 

23 

trading 

24 

internet 

25 

invoices 

26 

agent 

27 

penalty 


Reading Section 3, 
Questions 28-40 

28 C 

29 D 

30 A 

31 A 

32 B 

33 TRUE 

34 NOT GIVEN 

35 FALSE 

36 TRUE 

37 TRUE 

38 FALSE 

39 NOT GIVEN 

40 NOT GIVEN 


If you score ... 


0-24 

25-32 

33-40 

you are unlikely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions and 
we recommend that you spend 
a lot of time improving your 
English before you take IELTS. 

you may get an acceptable 
score under examination 
conditions but we recommend * 
that you think about having 
more practice or lessons 
before you take IELTS. 

you are likely to get an 
acceptable score under 
examination conditions but 
remember that different 
institutions will find different 
scores acceptable. 


128 












GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Sample answers for Writing tasks 

TEST 1, WRITING TASK 1 
SAMPLE ANSWER 

This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 7.0 score. 

P&ar Mr and Mrs Co llins, 

M'f name- is Aarola.1 have- swi four advertisement in a magazine and I'm writing to fou because 
I would like to be considered for the position fou are offering. I reallf would like to work for fou 
because i think it will be a good experience for fou and me. I like to travel, know about different 
cultures and meet new people. I have never been to Australia but I'm prettf sure there a lot of 
thing to see and trf. 1 have previous experience looking after children. Aurrentlf I'm working for an 
Irish familf and l take care of for children whose ages varf from three to eight.! have to saf that 
I've never thought that looking after children would be that rewarding. 1 enjof spending time with 
them and l have learnt a lot. I'm reallf patient, tidf, reliable, and hard working. 

in addition, l have just completed an first aids course. 

If l had the chance to live with fou would be great. 1 would spend mf free time learning English, 
visiting turist attractions, trying local food and making new friends. 

Thank fou for taking the time to read mf letter. Please feel free to contact me if fou need further 
details and recomendations. 

Kind regards, 

Aarola 

Here is the examiner’s comment: 

This answer presents a clear purpose with a consistent, appropriate tone. Each 
bullet point is clearly highlighted and covered, although there is room for some 
extension. Information and ideas are logically organised and cohesive devices are 
used appropriately. The range of vocabulary is sufficient to show some flexibility 
and precision, as well as use of collocation [the position you are offering | 
previous experience | rewarding \ taking the time to read my .letter \ contact 
me | further details]. There are only occasional spelling errors [first aids | turist j 
recomendations]. There is a range of complex grammatical structures with frequent 
error-free sentences. 


129 






GTE^’G b1 den Tips -of English 


Sample answers for Writing tasks 

TEST 1, WRITING TASK 2 
SAMPLE ANSWER 

This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 6.5 score. 

Nowaday millions of online shops are doing business and develope rapidly The majority of 
traditional shops concern if the-'/ will bankrupt soon due to the fast growing online shopping. 
However some people argue that a great deal of shops can still survive. 

firstly, the online shops always offer a ve-ry competitive price in order to obtain more and more 
consumers. They can always provide attractive promotion and sell the products in bottom price 
because they do not have to pay the ey-tra rental for the physical shops. For example, in my own 
country the daily turn over of Tao 6>ao on line shop is about io million, which is an astonishing 
amount. 

Secondly the people are teen on shopping on internet because it can save time, (especially 
the young generation are litely to browse the website of the shops at home in a comfortable 
atmosphere. They may flexibly select the goods that they lite without the persuading from the shop 
staff. They can also compare the prices between various shops due to price - checking system. 

However, some people said the traditional shops would still have their opportunities to retain their 
business. They suggest the owners of the chain stores or department stores can build up the online 
shops as well so as to maintain a stable .business. Actually, there a lot of shops that have built up 
their online shops, such as the renowned sport shop Nike. All the shops should look for a correct 
manner to increase their business. 

Ml in all, it is difficult to say that what is the advantage or disadvantage for online shopping. In my 
opinion, the owners of business should attain to check the trend of the business and quote a best 
price for keeping the purchasers. 

Here is the examiner’s comment: 

The candidate has covered all parts of the task but his/her position is not sufficiently 
clear for a higher band to be awarded. The response focuses on the advantages 
and disadvantages of online shopping, rather than on whether or not the writer 
agrees that this type of shopping will result in all shops in towns and cities closing. 
Organisation is logical, with appropriate use of cohesive devices and paragraphs 
and the range of vocabulary shows some less common items and use of collocation 
[fast growing | competitive \ keen on j browse the website \ price-checking system \ 
retain their business \ renowned ]. There is a mix of simple and complex sentence 
forms and the meaning is clear, in spite of some errors. 


130 











GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Sample answers for Writing tasks 


TEST 2, WRITIM6 TASK 1 

MODEL ANSWER 

This model has been prepared by an examiner as an example of a very good answer. 
However, please note that this is just one example out of many possible approaches. 

Pearloir or Madam 

The latest edition of'four travel magazine included an article about Cambridge; but this 
contained incorrect information. "The writer described the University of Cambridge as being 
the oldest in the world whereas in fact the oldest university in the English-speaking world is in 
Oxford. The University of Cambridge was founded in \Z0i but Oxford was Known to have existed 

in i o%. 

ik magazine such as yours has an international reputation and is extremely influential with 
travel companies and individuals aliKe. it is essential that any information published should be 
accurate and reliable and l was genuinely surprised that the facts had not been checked prior 
to publication. 

I feel that the least the magazine can do is to publish a correction and an apology in netf 
month's magazine. I would also urge you to ensure that all factual information is thoroughly 
checked before publication. 

Yours faithfully, 

Man Watson : 


131 





GTE 4 -' Golden 'Tips 'of English 


Sample answers for Writing tasks 

TEST 2, WRITING TASK 2 
SAMPLE ANSWER 

This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 8.0 score. 

Some of the people believe;.that friende with exactly the same opinions on different topics are better 
than the ones that can argue with them. 

On the one hand, having similar interests on hobbies is a reason to start a friendship. In this case 
people always have something to discuss. If your friend has the same view of particular problem as 
'/ou do, he can help you to find a solution faster, “ouch friend will always support you and take your 
side in any argument. He will be there for you in any situation. 

On the other hand, having egual opinions with you friend is sometimes boring. You always agree on 
ever'j ' SSLl& other and have no discussion or argument, if your friend disagrees with '{ou, 

1°u can discuss both views, reach a compromise and come up with a suitable solution, Eut strong 
disagreement can often lead to a heated argument or even ruin -four friendship. 

In my opinion, friends should not agree on everything they are talking about. I think that this hind 
of friendship is boring and it is not lihely to last for tong. However, a friend with the same opinion 
as yours will definitely support your point of view in any discussion. And it is a wonderful thing, too. 

In conclusion l would like to say that it [s good to have different views on some topics or problems 
but you should be loyal to the opinion of your friend. Everyone should appreciate their friendship 
and shouldn't let stupid arguments ruin it. 

Here is the examiner’s comment: 

The candidate has discussed both sides of the topic and provided his/her own 
opinion in the final two paragraphs. Ideas for each point of view are developed 
and supported, but there is room for further extension. The writing shows logical 
organisation and sequencing of ideas, with good use of cohesive devices [the ones 
that | In this case \ On the one hand ...On the other hand \ this kind of friendship j 
the same opinion as yours]. Paragraphing is used sufficiently and appropriately. 

The range of vocabulary includes some less common items and collocations 
[support you | take your side in [ be there for you \ reach a compromise \ come up 
with] and there are only rare errors [you / your friend]. There is a wide range of 
complex structures with very few errors (there are two cases of missing articles), 
but both vocabulary and grammatical range lack the sophistication expected from a 
Band 9 answer. 


132 



GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Sample answers for Writing tasks 

TEST 3, WRITING TASK 1 

SAMPLE ANSWER 

This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 7.0 score. 

Pear Sir or Madam, 

1 am writing to you to provide a feedback on the "Kitchen Wonders" cooke-ry course I have taken 
recently. As my cooking had become more and more complimented since, 1 would like to take this 

opportunity to express my appreciation for the evolution I have attained from the course. 

> 

Albeit a short and basic course, it contained useful tips on using cutlery and cookware which were 
entirely new to me. Having always cooked by instinct these tips (ena b led) brought to light simple 
mistakes I had been making, which now I avoid. Moreover, I particularly enjoyed the "Kitchen Hacks" 
module, and its techniques have brought my cooking skills to a new level. 

[ have been using these lessons on weekends, when I normally cook for my family, and the 
difference is clear. The effect the course had on my dishes has been remarked on some occasions, 
and this new found ability has been raising expectations as the word spreads throughout my 
relatives. Still, l am confident they shall not be disappointed. 

[ intend on honing this skill further, especially since the course did not address dessert-making. 
Should such a course be offered, I would be delighted to enroll and keep collecting awestruck 
expressions from my relatives. \ really appreciate the results your course has provided me, and 
1 look forward to even more. 

Sincerely, 

Taulo 

Here is the examiner’s comment: 

The response covers all the bullet points and develops them at some length. The 
purpose is dear and the only inconsistency in tone is the use of [Sincerely] to 
close the letter. Information and ideas are logically organised and there is a clear 
progression throughout. There is a range of cohesive devices, used appropriately 
[Albeit | it | which \ these tips \ Moreover], for example. The range of vocabulary 
is wide enough to show some less common items and collocations [cooked by 
instinct \ brought to light | Kitchen Hacks | new found ability | honing my skills \ 
awestruck ], with only minor errors [The effect the course had on my dishes has 
been remarked (upon) on some occasions \ enroll / enrol]. There is a variety 
of complex structures, with frequent error-free sentences and good control of 
punctuation with only a few errors. 


133 








GTE- Golden Tips of English 


•i 


Sample answers for Writing tasks 

I TEST 3, WRITING TASK 2 

SAMPLE ANSWER 

This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 8.5 score. 

in the. world, there are things we can bu^ pacing monety at the same time there are things that 
we'll never be able to get thought we are milianair. 

vte can make ourselves spending mone^ to bu'f visible items, such as expensive cars, bags, houses, 
clothes and so on. A friend of mine, when she is stressful she like to go shopping to get rid of the 
stress. Luckily she is rich so she is satisfied and happ'i after purchasing as marty things as possible. 
Also, mone'f can be verf important for some things which are not visible. For example, if arty of 
famil'f members is illed reguring a expensive surgery monety becomes the most important factor to 
decide to proceed with the surgery or just suffer without having the surgenf. 

vie can not onty make ourselves happ^ when we have lots of monety, we can also be happ^ with some 
things that we never bu'f with mone'f. 

M'f parents were not rich when ! was a child. I desired to get ictys and pretty clethings but the 
couldn't afford to btty them. 1 was disappointed that 1 could not have those things while m-f friends 
were having. 

F'ut rrty parents brought me up with unlimited love and the^ became rrty best friend to listen to me 
when 1 was in truble and needed adviie, As a result rrty childhood was happ'f and 1 grew up having 
positive wa'j of thinking instead of complainng for the things rrty parents couldn't bity for me. 

In conclusion through rrty experience, we can make our lives convenient when having enough monety. 
&ut, we do not need to be frustrated or desperate with not having lots of monq. 

Happiness depends on our mind set and it is always subjective to change if the amount of mone^ is 
considered a lot or little. 

Sty focusing on what we have on our hands now and drive to achieve'what we want to gain, we can 
always be bapp'j.' 

Here is the examiner’s comment: 

The candidate has addressed ail parts of the task and presents a well-developed 
response. Ideas are relevant, extended and supported throughout. The candidate’s 
task response is the best aspect of this piece of writing. Ideas are logically organised, 
with some use of cohesive devices, and there is a clear overall progression, but 
paragraphing is inconsistent and not always logical. The range of vocabulary is 
adventurous [proceed with the surgery \ unlimited love | positive way of thinking \ 
frustrated | desperate ], but there also errors in some quite basic items [thought/ 
though | milianair! millionaire | stressful i stressed | illed I ill | clethings / clothes | 
the / they | truble / trouble | adviie I advice | complainng / complaining], which limits 
the rating on Lexical Resource. There is a mix of simple and complex sentence 
forms, with a fair degree of accuracy, but a wider range and better control over 
punctuation would perhaps result in a higher score here. 


134 





GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Sample answers for Writing tasks 


TEST 4, WRITHING TASK 1 

SAMPLE ANSWER 

This is an answer written by a candidate who achieved a Band 6,0 score. 

bear Mr. Tremain, 

1 saw your concert recently at Manchester Halt and 1 thought your performance was very touching 
and excellent. I felt deeply connected with the lyrics in your songs. I am a current music student 
at Oxford university and our school is having a musical performance newt weeK. The play relates 
well to your latest song and I would'be very greatful if you can help with me musical activities by 
providing a more detail insight to your lyric. Also, could you give us some tips about performing 
as this is our first performance. &y giving an insight to your lyric, our drama and musical team a 
deeper connection to the song, which is what we really need. I hope l am not asking for too much. 
My team reallydoolcs up to you and it would mean the world if you write back. 

Thank You for reading this letter and 1 hope to hear from you soon. 

Yours hincerly, 

Here is the examiner’s comment: 

The candidate covers all three bullet points, but there is room for development of 
the ideas presented. There is an overall progression in the response, but it could 
be improved by using separate paragraphs for each topic. The range of vocabulary 
is sufficient for the task, with some attempts at less common items [lyrics \ insight ] 
and with only a few mistakes in spelling and word form [greatful / grateful | detail / 
detailed], though more specific vocabulary would improve the writing [the play I 
performance?]. Both simple and complex sentence structures are used, with some 
accuracy, but there appears to be a missing section [our drama and musical team 
(would obtain?) a deeper connection to the song]. 


135 






GTE- Golden' Tips ' Of English): ■ i■ ■ ■ 


Sample answers for Writing tasks 

TEST 4, WRITING TASK 2 
MODEL ANSWER 

This mode! has been prepared by an examiner as an example of a very good answer. 
However, pfease note that this is just one example out of many possible approaches. 

Nowadays many people work long hours, leaving them little time for leisure activities. 
There are some advantages in this situation, but personally I feel there are more 
disadvantages. The advantages include the possibility of earning more money, if the 
employer pays overtime for extra hours worked. This can be a real bonus if someone 
is saving with a particular goal in mind: a holiday, for example, or saving to buy a 
house or flat. Another advantage might be that more time spent at work enables a 
more thorough knowledge and understanding of the job. Some professions such as 
law and accountancy require familiarity with a wide range of rules and requirements 
and these cannot all be learned through study; they have to be learned on the job. 
For younger people there is also the sheer stimulus of being involved in something 
they enjoy, so that they do not object to, or count, the hours they spend at work. 

Unfortunately, if people do not have enough time to relax, there are quite major 
risks associated with this. Health often suffers, either physically or mentally, and 
sometimes both. Taking time out for physical leisure activities has positive effects on 
health through the release of chemicals that make us feel better both physically and 
mentally. Other leisure activities may involve spending time with a group of people, 
activating skills other than those used at work and thus encouraging supportive 
social networks. 

Friendships can also be weakened because of not making enough time to stay in 
touch, but using only a little of your free time to have a meal or go to the cinema 
with someone helps to maintain that friendship. Listening to your friend’s problems, 
or talking through your own, reinforces your relationship with them, as well as 
allowing you to switch off mentally from the things that have been happening at work. 
This ‘distancing’ from work helps you to get things back into perspective and can 
sometimes help you to find solutions to matters that have been bothering you. 

Within a family situation a partner may feel neglected If the other one spends long 
hours away at work, or a child may feel neglected because mummy/daddy is never 
around for birthdays, school performances or a vital sports match. This lack of 
involvement is a major contributor to family breakdown, which in turn has wider 
repercussions in our society. 

Work is a major part of our lives and it is to be hoped that many find it enjoyable, 
challenging and stimulating, but it is important to recognise the need for a work-life 
balance and to ensure that this is put into practice. 


136 










GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Sample answer sheets 


@@ BRITISH 
@® COUNCIL 


^idp 

IELTS Listening Answer Sheet 


Cambridge Assessment 
English 



Candidate 

Name 

Candidate 

No. 


1350 









Centre 

No. 




i | 









Test Date D J | j MK]|h | | 1 Year | 







aiMs 







L’artsr uss an}/ 


Marker use ant/ 

a 




1 

✓ * 
nn 

m 


21 
✓ X 

aa 

2 


2 

✓ X 

an 

22 


22 

caai 

ffl 


3 

✓ X 
□ □ 

m 


23 
y * 
a a 

4 


4 

✓ X 

aa 

24 


24 

/ X 

aa 

Him 


5 

/ X 

aa 

gg 


25 

/ X 

aa 

6 


6 

y x 

aa 

26 


26 
✓ X 
i_J 1 — 1 

■ 


7 

✓ X 
□ □ 

li 

mm 


27 
y x 
aa 

8 


6 

✓ X 

aa 

28 


28 
✓ K 

aa 

H 

-*———-— 

9 

/ * 

aa 

m 

Hell 

... 

29 
y x 
aa 

10 


10 
y x 
aa 

30 


30 

✓ X 

aa 

D 


11 
✓ X 

(=1a 

m 


31 
y x 
aa 

12 


12 
y x 
aa 

32 


32 
y x 

i—11 —j 

|i 

§311 


13 

✓ * 
C3EOJ 

m 


33 
y x 
aa 

14 


14 

✓ X 

aa 

34 


34 

/ X 

aa 

IH 




15 

✓ X 

t=JC=l 

B 


35 

✓ X 

aa 

16 


16 
✓ X 

□ a 

36 


36 

/ X 

aa 

S 


17 

B 


37 

✓ X 

aa 

18 


18 

y 

38 


38 

✓ X 

aa 

ii 

~ .. . ..... 

19 

/ X 

aa 

B 

. 

39 

/ X 

aa 

20 


20 
/ X 

na 

40 


40 

✓ X 

aa 

Mariter 2 
Signature: 


Marker 1 
Signature: 

| Listening Total 

m 


20656 




> UCLES 2019 


Photocopiable 


137 


















































































































































































GTE'- Golde-n- Tips o f English] ■ 1 '■. -••• ■ ■■■- -- * 


Sample answer sheets 


©@ BRITISH 
- G COUNCIL 


%idp 

English 

SEITS Reading Answer Sheet 


® Cambridge Assessment 
r ... 


Candidate 

Name 

Candidate 

No. 

Test 




• UCLES 2019 


138 





































































































































































































GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Sample answer sheets 


i BRITISH 
COUNCIL 


sydp 

IELTS Writing Answer Sheet - TASK 1 


Cambridge Assessment 
English 


Candidate 

Name 

Candidate 

No. 

Test 


Centre 

No. 


Module □ Academic □ General Training Test Date 


Day 


3 


if you need more space to write your Bfiswer, U3S addllional sheet and write in tha spoca provided lo indicate how many sheets you arc using; Sheet 


Do not write below Ihls line 


Do not write in this area. Please continue your answer on the other side of this sheet. 



23505 


! 1 iliiUMi ■ 


© UCLES 2019 HUS 


139 














































































GTE^- Golden Tips 'of English)’ ! i-. : : 


Sample answer sheets 


i 

i 


BRITISH 


- _ ^ i!$a Cambridge Assessment 

©©COUNCIL ^Idp iPj -• 


' English 

IELTS Writing Answer Sheet - TASK 2 


J Candidate 
Name 
i Candidate 
No, 

Test 



Centre 

No. 


I] Academic Q General Training TestDate^ 

| 1 Month) j | Year) 


If you need more space to write your answer, use an additional sheet and write In (ha space prodded lo indicate how many sheets you are using: S ilSSt 


of 


□ 


Writing Task 2 Writing Task 2 Writing Task 2 Writing Task 2 


Do not write helow this line 


Do not write in this area. Please continue your answer on the other side of this sheet. 


Eal^ig 

M 


39507 

E53 


1 UCLES 2019 


140 













































































GTE- Golden Tips of English 


Acknowledgements 

The authors and publishers acknowledge the following sources of copyright material 
and are grateful for the permissions granted. While every effort has been made, it has 
not always been possible to identify the sources of all the material used, or to trace 
all copyright holders. If any omissions are brought to our notice, we will be happy to 
include the appropriate acknowledgements on reprinting and in the next update to the 
digital edition, as applicable. 

Reading - Test 1: Text adapted frojn Transition care (care after a hospital stay)’ by 
Myagedcare. Copyright © Commonwealth of Australia as represented by the Department 
of Health. Reproduced with kind permission; Text adapted from ‘LTU Car Parking Policy 
AY 2018/19'. Copyright © 2018 Leeds Trinity University. Reproduced with kind permission; 
Text contains public sector information licensed under the Open Government Licence 
v3.0.; Test 2: Text extracted from WorkSmart, the work advice website of the Trades Union 
Congress www.worksmart.org.uk. Reproduced with kind permission; Text adapted from '8 
Steps to Achieving Work-Life Balance’ by Joanna Ireland. Copyright ©TopResume, a Talent 
Inc. company, www.topresume.com. Reproduced with kind permission; Text adapted from 
‘Golden Gate Bridge’ by History.com Editors. Courtesy of A+E Networks. Reproduced with 
permission; Test 3: Text adapted from ‘Monitoring at work’. Copyright© Citizens Advice. 
Reproduced with kind permission; Test 4: The Independent for the adapted text from ‘10 
best travel wallets’ by Becca Meier. Copyright© 2017, The Independent. Reproduced with 
permission; Text adapted from ‘How do I claim back money for my delayed train?’ by Harry 
Rose. Copyright© 2017, Which?. Reproduced with kind permission; Text adapted from The 
many faces of the Swiss postbus’ by Vitali Vitaliev. Copyright© 2017 Syon Geographical Ltd. 
Reproduced with permission. 


141 






GTE 4 -' Golden Tips English) •’! 


..b. gee v.; 




GTE- GoTderT'Tips of English 















GTE- Golden Tips' of Englfsg ' 






IELTS 

GENERALTRAINING 14 

WITH ANSWERS 


Prepare for the exam with practice tests from Cambridge 

inside you'll find four authentic examination' : Whyare they unique? 

papers from Cambridge Assessment hn'glfeh All our authentic practice tests go through the 
Theygre theperfect way to. practise - EXACTLY ■ same design process as the IELTS test, 
like the real exam. . , ,.'! 1 1 

ywe check every single part of our practice 

Be confident on exam day: • i./.:'. . y ! tests with reai students under exam conditions. 

• Get Lq know tine exam format to make sure wc give you the most authentic 

A,_... experience possible 


Be confident on exam day: 

• Get to. know the exahn format 

•. Understand the.scormg systepi 

• Train in examination techniques 


IELTS 


IELTS 6 


IELTS 7 


IELTS 


IELTS 


ISBN: 978-1-108-64855:4 


ISBN: 978-1-108-64780-9 


ISBN: 978-1-108-64829-5 


ISBN: 978-1,108-63507-3 


ISBN: 978-1-108-67150-7 


ISBN: 978-1-108.-59254-3 ISBN: 978-1-108-61077-3 


ISBN: 978.1 108-55531-9 


ISBN: 978-1-108-64753-3 



ISBN: 978-1-107-69491-0 


Cambridge 

UNIVERSITY PRESS 


Cambridge Assessment 
English 


Experts together 


Our aim is to deliver the materials you tell us you need. 
Exclusive insights from test development and candidate 
performance guarantee expert content. The result is a unique 
Exam Journey in each course, ensuring every student is ready 
on exam day. From skills development to exam tasks, language 
discovery to real-world usage, we create better learning 
experiences, together. 


Experience 

Bummi 



Official 

Cambridge 

Exam 

Preparation 



IlllllllllilllUIII! 

GT142SLB1 
ISBN 978-1-108-69486-5 


9 "781 


08 694865 > 


a! {ft: 128 70 



















































